
            
                
            
        



The Name of the Wind

The Kingkiller Chronicle Day One

Patrick Rothfuss

 

To my mother, who
taught me to love books and opened the door to Narnia, Pern, and Middle Earth.

And to my father,
who taught me that if I was going to do something, I should take my time and do
it right.



Acknowledgments

To…

…all the readers of my early drafts. You are
legion, too many to name, but not too many to love. I kept writing because of
your encouragement. I kept improving because of your criticism. If not for you,
I would not have won…

…the Writers of the Future contest. If not for
their workshop, I would never have met my wonderful anthology-mates from volume
18 or…

…Kevin J. Anderson. If not for his advice, I would
never have ended up with…

…Matt Bialer, the best of agents. If not for his
guidance, I would never have sold the book to…

…Betsy Wolheim, beloved editor and president of
DAW. If not for her, you would not be holding this book. A similar book,
perhaps, but this book would not exist.

And, lastly, to Mr. Bohage, my high school history
teacher. In 1989 I told him I’d mention him in my first novel. I keep my
promises.



 





 



 

PROLOGUE

A Silence of Three
Parts

IT
WAS NIGHT AGAIN. The Waystone Inn lay in silence, and it was a silence of three
parts.

The most obvious part was a hollow, echoing quiet,
made by things that were lacking. If there had been a wind it would have sighed
through the trees, set the inn’s sign creaking on its hooks, and brushed the
silence down the road like trailing autumn leaves. If there had been a crowd,
even a handful of men inside the inn, they would have filled the silence with
conversation and laughter, the clatter and clamor one expects from a drinking
house during the dark hours of night. If there had been music…but no, of course
there was no music. In fact there were none of these things, and so the silence
remained.

Inside the Waystone a pair of men huddled at one
corner of the bar. They drank with quiet determination, avoiding serious
discussions of troubling news. In doing this they added a small, sullen silence
to the larger, hollow one. It made an alloy of sorts, a counterpoint.

The third silence was not an easy thing to notice.
If you listened for an hour, you might begin to feel it in the wooden floor
underfoot and in the rough, splintering barrels behind the bar. It was in the
weight of the black stone hearth that held the heat of a long dead fire. It was
in the slow back and forth of a white linen cloth rubbing along the grain of
the bar. And it was in the hands of the man who stood there, polishing a
stretch of mahogany that already gleamed in the lamplight.

The man had true-red hair, red as flame. His eyes
were dark and distant, and he moved with the subtle certainty that comes from
knowing many things.

The Waystone was his, just as the third silence was
his. This was appropriate, as it was the greatest silence of the three,
wrapping the others inside itself. It was deep and wide as autumn’s ending. It
was heavy as a great river-smooth stone. It was the patient, cut-flower sound
of a man who is waiting to die.



CHAPTER TWO

A Beautiful Day

IT
WAS ONE OF those perfect autumn days so common in stories and so rare in the
real world. The weather was warm and dry, ideal for ripening a field of wheat
or corn. On both sides of the road the trees were changing color. Tall poplars
had gone a buttery yellow while the shrubby sumac encroaching on the road was
tinged a violent red. Only the old oaks seemed reluctant to give up the summer,
and their leaves remained an even mingling of gold and green.

Everything said, you couldn’t hope for a nicer day
to have a half dozen ex-soldiers with hunting bows relieve you of everything
you owned.

“She’s not much of a horse, sir,” Chronicler said.
“One small step above a dray, and when it rains she—”

The man cut him off with a sharp gesture. “Listen
friend, the king’s army is paying good money for anything with four legs and at
least one eye. If you were stark mad and riding a hobbyhorse down the road, I’d
still take it off you.”

Their leader had an air of command about him.
Chronicler guessed he had been a low ranking officer not long ago. “Just hop
down,” he said seriously. “We’ll get this done with and you can be on your
way.”

Chronicler climbed down from his horse. He had been
robbed before and knew when there was nothing to be gained by discussion. These
fellows knew their business. No energy was wasted on bravado or idle threats.
One of them looked over the horse, checking hooves, teeth, and harness. Two
others went through his saddlebags with a military efficiency, laying all his
worldly possessions out on the ground. Two blankets, a hooded cloak, the flat
leather satchel, and his heavy, well-stocked travelsack.

“That’s all of it, Commander,” one of the men said.
“Except for about twenty pounds of oats.”

The commander knelt down and opened the flat
leather satchel, peering inside.

“There’s nothing but paper and pens in there,”
Chronicler said.

The commander turned to look backward over his
shoulder. “You a scribe then?”

Chronicler nodded. “It’s my livelihood, sir. And no
real use to you.”

The man looked through the satchel, found it to be true,
and set it aside. Then he upended the travelsack onto Chronicler’s spread cloak
and poked idly through the contents.

He took most of Chronicler’s salt and a pair of
bootlaces. Then, much to the scribe’s dismay, he picked up the shirt Chronicler
had bought back in Linwood. It was fine linen dyed a deep, royal blue, too nice
for traveling. Chronicler hadn’t even had the chance to wear it yet. He sighed.

The commander left everything else lying on the
cloak and got to his feet. The others took turns going through Chronicler’s
things.

The commander spoke up, “You only have one blanket,
don’t you Janns?” One of the men nodded. “Take one of his then, you’ll need a
second before winter’s through.”

“His cloak is in better shape than mine, sir.”

“Take it, but leave yours. The same for you,
Witkins. Leave your old tinderbox if you’re taking his.”

“I lost mine, sir,” Witkins said. “Else I would.”

The whole process was surprisingly civilized.
Chronicler lost all of his needles but one, both extra pairs of socks, a bundle
of dried fruit, a loaf of sugar, half a bottle of alcohol, and a pair of ivory
dice. They left him the rest of his clothes, his dried meat, and a half-eaten
loaf of incredibly stale rye bread. His flat leather satchel remained
untouched.

While the men repacked his travelsack, the
commander turned to Chronicler. “Let’s have the purse then.”

Chronicler handed it over.

“And the ring.”

“There’s hardly any silver in it,” Chronicler
mumbled as he unscrewed it from his finger.

“What’s that around your neck?”

Chronicler unbuttoned his shirt, revealing a dull
ring of metal hanging from a leather cord. “Just iron, sir.”

The commander came close and rubbed it between his
fingers before letting it fall back against Chronicler’s chest. “Keep it then.
I’m not one to come between a man and his religion,” he said, then emptied the
purse into one hand, making a pleasantly surprised noise as he prodded through
the coins with his finger. “Scribing pays better than I thought,” he said as he
began to count out shares to his men.

“I don’t suppose you could spare me a penny or two
out of that?” Chronicler asked. “Just enough for a couple of hot meals?”

The six men turned to look at Chronicler, as if
they couldn’t quite believe what they had heard.

The commander laughed. “God’s body, you certainly
have a heavy pair, don’t you?” There was a grudging respect in his voice.

“You seem a reasonable fellow,” Chronicler said
with a shrug. “And a man’s got to eat.”

Their leader smiled for the first time. “A
sentiment I can agree with.” He took out two pennies and brandished them before
putting them back into Chronicler’s purse. “Here’s a pair for your pair, then.”
He tossed Chronicler the purse and stuffed the beautiful royal-blue shirt into
his saddlebag.

“Thank you, sir,” Chronicler said. “You might want
to know that that bottle one of your men took is wood alcohol I use for
cleaning my pens. It’ll go badly if he drinks it.”

The commander smiled and nodded. “You see what
comes of treating people well?” he said to his men as he pulled himself up onto
his horse. “It’s been a pleasure, sir scribe. If you get on your way now, you
can still make Abbott’s Ford by dark.”

When Chronicler could no longer hear their
hoofbeats in the distance, he repacked his travelsack, making sure everything
was well stowed. Then he tugged off one of his boots, stripped out the lining,
and removed a tightly wrapped bundle of coins stuffed deep into the toe. He
moved some of these into his purse, then unfastened his pants, produced another
bundle of coins from underneath several layers of clothes, and moved some of
that money into his purse as well.

The key was to keep the proper amount in your
purse. Too little and they would be disappointed and prone to look for more.
Too much and they would be excited and might get greedy.

There was a third bundle of coins baked into the
stale loaf of bread that only the most desperate of criminals would be
interested in. He left that alone for now, as well as the whole silver talent
he had hidden in a jar of ink. Over the years he had come to think of the last
as more of a luck piece. No one had ever found that.

He had to admit, it was probably the most civil
robbery he’d ever been through. They had been genteel, efficient, and not
terribly savvy. Losing the horse and saddle was hard, but he could buy another
in Abbott’s Ford and still have enough money to live comfortably until he
finished this foolishness and met up with Skarpi in Treya.

Feeling an urgent call of nature, Chronicler pushed
his way through the bloodred sumac at the side of the road. As he was
rebuttoning his pants, there was sudden motion in the underbrush as a dark
shape thrashed its way free of some nearby bushes.

Chronicler staggered back, crying out in alarm
before he realized it was nothing more than a crow beating its wings into
flight. Chuckling at his own foolishness, he straightened his clothes and made
his way back to the road through the sumac, brushing away invisible strands of
spiderweb that clung tickling to his face.

As he shouldered his travelsack and satchel,
Chronicler found himself feeling remarkably lighthearted. The worst had
happened, and it hadn’t been that bad. A breeze tussled through the trees,
sending poplar leaves spinning like golden coins down onto the rutted dirt
road. It was a beautiful day.



CHAPTER FIVE

Notes

IT
WAS WELL PAST midnight by the time Kote made it back to Newarre with
Chronicler’s limp body slung across his lacerated shoulders. The town’s houses
and shops were dark and silent, but the Waystone Inn was full of light.

Bast stood in the doorway, practically dancing with
irritation. When he spotted the approaching figure he rushed down the street,
waving a piece of paper angrily. “A note? You sneak out and leave me a note?” He hissed angrily. “What am I, some dockside
whore?”

Kote turned around and shrugged Chronicler’s limp
body into Bast’s arms. “I knew you would just argue with me, Bast.”

Bast held Chronicler easily in front of him. “It
wasn’t even a good note. ‘If you are reading this I
am probably dead.’ What sort of a note is that?”

“You weren’t supposed to find it till morning,”
Kote said tiredly as they began to walk down the street to the inn.

Bast looked down at the man he was carrying, as if
noticing him for the first time. “Who is this?” He shook him a little, eyeing
him curiously before slinging him easily over one shoulder like a burlap sack.

“Some unlucky sod who happened to be on the road at
the wrong time,” Kote said dismissively. “Don’t shake him too much. His head
might be on a little loose.”

“What the hell did you sneak off for, anyway?” Bast
demanded as they entered the inn. “If you’re going to leave a note it should at
least tell me what—” Bast’s eyes widened as he saw Kote in the light of the
inn, pale and streaked with blood and dirt.

“You can go ahead and worry if you want,” Kote said
dryly. “It’s every bit as bad as it looks.”

“You went out hunting for them, didn’t you?” Bast
hissed, then his eyes widened. “No. You kept a piece of the one Carter killed.
I can’t believe you. You lied to me. To me!”

Kote sighed as he trudged up the stairs. “Are you
upset by the lie, or the fact that you didn’t catch me at it?” he asked as he
began to climb.

Bast spluttered. “I’m upset that you thought you
couldn’t trust me.”

They let their conversation lapse as they opened
one of the many empty rooms on the second floor, undressed Chronicler, and
tucked him snugly into bed. Kote left the man’s satchel and travelsack on the
floor nearby.

Closing the door to the room behind him, Kote said,
“I trust you Bast, but I wanted you safe. I knew I could handle it.”

“I could have helped, Reshi.” Bast’s tone was
injured. “You know I would have.”

“You can still help, Bast,” Kote said as he made
his way to his room and sat heavily on the edge of his narrow bed. “I need some
stitching done.” He began to unbutton his shirt. “I could do it myself. But the
tops of my shoulders and my back are hard to reach.”

“Nonsense, Reshi. I’ll do it.”

Kote made a gesture to the door. “My supplies are
down in the basement.”

Bast sniffed disdainfully. “I will use my own
needles, thank you very much. Good honest bone. None of your nasty jagged iron
things, stabbing you like little slivers of hate.” He shivered. “Stream and
stone, it’s frightening how primitive you people are.” Bast bustled out of the
room, leaving the door open behind him.

Kote slowly removed his shirt, grimacing and
sucking his breath through his teeth as the dried blood stuck and tugged
against the wounds. His face went stoic again when Bast came back into the room
with a basin of water and began to clean him off.

As the dried blood was washed away a wild scoring
of long, straight cuts became clear. They gaped redly against the innkeeper’s
fair skin, as if he had been slashed with a barber’s razor or a piece of broken
glass. There were perhaps a dozen cuts in all, most of them on the tops of his
shoulders, a few across his back and along his arms. One started on the top of
his head and ran down his scalp to behind his ear.

“I thought you weren’t supposed to bleed, Reshi,”
Bast said. “Bloodless and all that.”

“Don’t believe everything you hear in stories,
Bast. They lie to you.”

“Well you aren’t nearly as bad off as I thought,”
Bast said, wiping his hands clean. “Though by all rights you should have lost a
piece of your ear. Were they wounded like the one that attacked Carter?”

“Not that I could see,” Kote said.

“How many were there?”

“Five.”

“Five?” Bast said, aghast. “How many did the other
fellow kill?”

“He distracted one of them for a while,” Kote said
generously.

“Anpauen, Reshi,” Bast
said, shaking his head as he threaded a bone needle with something thinner and
finer than gut. “You should be dead. You should be dead twice.”

Kote shrugged. “It’s not the first time I should be
dead, Bast. I’m a fair hand at avoiding it.”

Bast bent to his work. “This will sting a bit,” he
said, his hands strangely gentle. “Honestly Reshi, I can’t see how you’ve
managed to stay alive this long.”

Kote shrugged again and closed his eyes. “Neither
do I, Bast,” he said. His voice was tired and grey.

 

Hours later, the door to Kote’s room cracked open
and Bast peered inside. Hearing nothing but slow, measured breathing, the young
man walked softly to stand beside the bed and bent over the sleeping man. Bast
eyed the color of his cheeks, smelled his breath, and lightly touched his
forehead, his wrist, and the hollow of his throat above his heart.

Then Bast drew a chair alongside the bed and sat,
watching his master, listening to him breathe. After a moment he reached out
and brushed the unruly red hair back from his face, like a mother would with a
sleeping child. Then he began to sing softly, the tune lilting and strange,
almost a lullaby:

 

“How odd to watch a mortal kindle

Then to dwindle day by day.

Knowing their bright souls are tinder

And the wind will have its way.

Would I could my own fire lend.

What does your flickering portend?”

 

Bast’s voice faded until at last he sat motionless,
watching the rise and fall of his master’s silent breathing through the long
hours of morning’s early dark.



CHAPTER FOUR

Halfway to
Newarre

CHRONICLER
WALKED. Yesterday he had limped, but today there was no part of his feet that
didn’t hurt, so limping did no good. He had searched for horses in Abbott’s
Ford and Rannish, offering outrageous prices for even the most broken-down
animals. But in small towns like these, people didn’t have horses to spare,
especially not with harvest fast approaching.

Despite a hard day’s walking, he was still on the
road when night fell, making the rutted dirt road a stumbling ground of
half-seen shapes. After two hours of fumbling through the dark, Chronicler saw
light flickering through the trees and abandoned any thought of making it to
Newarre that night, deciding a farmstead’s hospitality would be welcome enough.

He left the road, blundering through the trees
toward the light. But the fire was farther away than he had thought, and
larger. It wasn’t lamplight from a house, or even sparks from a campfire. It
was a bonfire roaring in the ruins of an old house, little more than two
crumbling stone walls. Huddled into the corner those two walls made was a man.
He wore a heavy hooded cloak, bundled up as if it were full winter and not a
mild autumn evening.

Chronicler’s hopes rose at the sight of a small
cook fire with a pot hanging over it. But as he came close, he caught a foul
scent mingling with the woodsmoke. It reeked of burning hair and rotting
flowers. Chronicler quickly decided that whatever the man was cooking in the iron
pot, he wanted none of it. Still, even a place next to a fire was better than
curling up by the side of the road.

Chronicler stepped into the circle of firelight. “I
saw your f—” He stopped as the figure sprang quickly to its feet, a sword held
with both hands. No, not a sword, a long, dark cudgel of some sort, too
regularly shaped to be a piece of firewood.

Chronicler stopped dead in his tracks. “I was just
looking for a place to sleep,” he said quickly, his hand unconsciously
clutching at the circle of iron that hung around his neck. “I don’t want any
trouble. I’ll leave you to your dinner.” He took a step backward.

The figure relaxed, and the cudgel dropped to grate
metallically against a stone. “Charred body of God, what are you doing out here
at this time of night?”

“I was headed to Newarre and saw your fire.”

“You just followed a strange fire into the woods at
night?” The hooded figure shook his head. “You might as well come here.” He
motioned Chronicler closer, and the scribe saw he was wearing thick leather
gloves. “Tehlu anyway, have you had bad luck your whole life, or have you been
saving it all up for tonight?”

“I don’t know who you’re waiting for,” Chronicler
said, taking a step backward. “But I’m sure you’d rather do it alone.”

“Shut up and listen,” the man said sharply. “I
don’t know how much time we have.” He looked down and rubbed at his face. “God,
I never know how much to tell you people. If you don’t believe me, you’ll think
I’m crazy. If you do believe me, you’ll panic and be
worse than useless.” Looking back up, he saw Chronicler hadn’t moved. “Get over
here, damn you. If you go back out there you’re as good as dead.”

Chronicler glanced over his shoulder into the dark
of the forest. “Why? What’s out there?”

The man gave a short, bitter laugh and shook his
head in exasperation. “Honestly?” He ran his hand absentmindedly though his
hair, brushing his hood back in the process. In the firelight his hair was
impossibly red, his eyes a shocking, vibrant green. He looked at Chronicler,
sizing him up. “Demons,” he said. “Demons in the shape of big, black spiders.”

Chronicler relaxed. “There’s no such thing as
demons.” From his tone it was obvious he’d said the same thing many, many times
before.

The red-haired man gave an incredulous laugh. “Well,
I guess we can all go home then!” He flashed a manic grin at Chronicler.
“Listen, I’m guessing you’re an educated man. I respect that, and for the most
part, you’re right.” His expression went serious. “But here and now, tonight,
you’re wrong. Wrong as wrong can be. You don’t want to be on that side of the
fire when you figure that out.”

The flat certainty in the man’s voice sent a chill
down Chronicler’s back. Feeling more than slightly foolish, he stepped
delicately around to the other side of the bonfire.

The man sized him up quickly. “I don’t suppose you
have any weapons?” Chronicler shook his head. “It doesn’t really matter. A
sword wouldn’t do you much good.” He handed Chronicler a heavy piece of
firewood. “You probably won’t be able to hit one, but it’s worth a try. They’re
fast. If one of them gets on you, just fall down. Try to land on it, crush it
with your body. Roll on it. If you get hold of one, throw it into the fire.”

He drew the hood back over his head, speaking
quickly. “If you have any extra clothes, put them on. If you have a blanket you
could wrap—”

He stopped suddenly and looked out across the
circle of firelight. “Get your back against the wall,” he said abruptly,
bringing his iron cudgel up with both hands.

Chronicler looked past the bonfire. Something dark
was moving in the trees.

They came into the light, moving low across the
ground: black shapes, many-legged and large as cart wheels. One, quicker than
the rest, rushed into the firelight without hesitating, moving with the
disturbing, sinuous speed of a scuttling insect.

Before Chronicler could raise his piece of
firewood, the thing skirted sideways around the bonfire and sprang at him,
quick as a cricket. Chronicler threw up his hands just as the black thing
struck his face and chest. Its cold, hard legs scrabbled for a hold and he felt
bright stripes of pain across the backs of his arm. Staggering away, the scribe
felt his heel snag on the rough ground, and he began to topple over backward,
arms flailing wildly.

As he fell, Chronicler caught one last glimpse of
the circle of firelight. More of the black things were scuttling out of the
dark, their feet beating a quick staccato rhythm against roots and rocks and
leaves. On the other side of the fire the man in the heavy cloak held his iron
cudgel ready with both hands. He stood perfectly still, perfectly silent,
waiting.

Still falling backward with the dark thing on top
of him, Chronicler felt a dull, dark explosion as the back of his head struck
the stone wall behind him. The world slowed, turned blurry, then black.

 

Chronicler opened his eyes to a confusing mass of
dark shapes and firelight. His skull throbbed. There were several lines of
bright, clear pain crossing the backs of his arms and a dull ache that pulled
at his left side every time he drew in a breath.

After a long moment of concentration the world came
into a blurry focus. The bundled man sat nearby. He was no longer wearing his
gloves, and his heavy cloak hung off his body in loose tatters, but other than
that he seemed unscathed. His hood was up, hiding his face.

“You’re awake?” the man asked curiously. “That’s
good. You can never be sure with a head wound.” The hood tilted a bit. “Can you
talk? Do you know where you are?”

“Yes,” Chronicler said thickly. It seemed to take
far too much effort to make a single word.

“Even better. Now, third time pays for all. Do you
think you can stand up and lend me a hand? We need to burn and bury the
bodies.”

Chronicler moved his head a bit and felt suddenly
dizzy and nauseous. “What happened?”

“I might have broken a couple of your ribs,” the
man said. “One of them was all over you. I didn’t have a lot of options.” He
shrugged. “I’m sorry, for whatever that’s worth. I’ve already stitched up the
cuts on your arms. They should heal up nicely.”

“They’re gone?”

The hood nodded once. “The scrael don’t retreat.
They’re like wasps from a hive. They keep attacking until they die.”

A horrified look spread over Chronicler’s face.
“There’s a hive of these things?”

“Dear God, no. There were just these five. Still,
we have to burn and bury them, just to be sure. I already cut the wood we’ll
need: ash and rowan.”

Chronicler gave a laugh that sounded slightly
hysterical. “Just like the children’s song:



“Let me tell you what to do.





Dig a pit that’s ten by two.





Ash and elm and rowan too—”



“Yes indeed,” the bundled man said dryly. “You’d be
surprised at the sorts of things hidden away in children’s songs. But while I
don’t think we need to dig the entire ten feet down, I wouldn’t refuse a little
help….” He trailed off meaningfully.

Chronicler moved one hand to feel the back of his
head gingerly, then looked at his fingers, surprised that they weren’t covered
in blood. “I think I’m fine,” he said as he cautiously levered himself up onto
one elbow and from there into a sitting position. “Is there any—” His eyes
flickered and he went limp, falling bonelessly backward. His head struck the
ground, bounced once, and came to rest tilted slightly to one side.

 

Kote sat patiently for a few long moments, watching
the unconscious man. When there was no movement other than the chest slowly
rising and falling, he came stiffly to his feet and knelt at Chronicler’s side.
Kote lifted one eyelid, then the other and grunted at what he saw, not seeming
particularly surprised.

“I don’t suppose there’s any chance of you waking
up again?” he asked without much hope in his voice. He tapped Chronicler’s pale
cheek lightly. “No chance at—” A drop of blood spotted Chronicler’s forehead,
followed quickly by another.

Kote straightened up so that he was no longer
leaning over the unconscious man and wiped the blood away as best he could,
which wasn’t very well, as his hands were covered in blood themselves. “Sorry,”
he said absently.

He gave a deep sigh and pushed back his hood. His red
hair was matted down against his head, and half his face was smeared with
drying blood. Slowly he began to peel away the tattered remains of his cloak.
Underneath was a leather blacksmith’s apron, wildly scored with cuts. He
removed that as well, revealing a plain grey shirt of homespun. Both his
shoulders and his left arm were dark and wet with blood.

Kote fingered the buttons of his shirt for a
moment, then decided against removing it. Climbing gingerly to his feet, he
picked up the spade and slowly, painfully, began to dig.



CHAPTER TEN

Alar and Several
Stones

BEN
HELD UP A chunk of dirty fieldstone slightly bigger than his fist.

“What will happen if I let go of this rock?”

I thought for a bit. Simple questions during lesson
time were very seldom simple. Finally I gave the obvious answer. “It will
probably fall.”

He raised an eyebrow. I had kept him busy over the
last several months, and he hadn’t had the leisure to accidentally burn them
off. “Probably? You sound like a sophist, boy. Hasn’t it always fallen before?”

I stuck my tongue out at him. “Don’t try to
boldface your way through this one. That’s a fallacy. You taught me that
yourself.”

He grinned. “Fine. Would it be fair to say you
believe it will fall?”

“Fair enough.”

“I want you to believe it will fall up when I let
go of it.” His grin widened.

I tried. It was like doing mental gymnastics. After
a while I nodded. “Okay.”

“How well do you believe it?”

“Not very well,” I admitted.

“I want you to believe this rock will float away.
Believe it with a faith that will move mountains and shake trees.” He paused
and seemed to take a different tack. “Do you believe in God?”

“Tehlu? After a fashion.”

“Not good enough. Do you believe in your parents?”

I gave a little smile. “Sometimes. I can’t see them
right now.”

He snorted and unhooked the slapstick he used to
goad Alpha and Beta when they were being lazy. “Do you believe in this, E’lir?”
He only called me E’lir when he thought I was being especially willfully
obstinate. He held out the stick for my inspection.

There was a malicious glitter in his eye. I decided
not to tempt fate. “Yes.”

“Good.” He slapped the side of the wagon with it,
producing a sharp crack. One of Alpha’s ears pivoted
around at the noise, uncertain as to whether or not it was directed at her.
“That’s the sort of belief I want. It’s called Alar:
riding-crop belief. When I drop this stone it will float away, free as a bird.”

He brandished the slapstick a bit. “And none of
your petty philosophy or I’ll make you sorry you ever took a shining to that
little game.”

I nodded. I cleared my mind with one of the tricks
I’d already learned, and bore down on believing. I started to sweat.

After what may have been ten minutes I nodded
again.

He let go of the rock. It fell.

I began to get a headache.

He picked the rock back up. “Do you believe that it
floated?”

“No!” I sulked, rubbing my temples.

“Good. It didn’t. Never fool yourself into
perceiving things that don’t exist. It’s a fine line to walk, but sympathy is
not an art for the weak willed.”

He held out the rock again. “Do you believe it will
float?”

“It didn’t!”

“It doesn’t matter. Try again.” He shook the stone.
“Alar is the cornerstone of sympathy. If you are going to impose your will on
the world, you must have control over what you believe.”

I tried and I tried. It was the most difficult
thing I had ever done. It took me almost all afternoon.

Finally Ben was able to drop the rock and I
retained my firm belief that it wouldn’t fall despite evidence to the contrary.

I heard the thump of the rock and I looked at Ben.
“I’ve got it,” I said calmly, feeling more than a little smug.

He looked at me out of the corner of his eye, as if
he didn’t quite believe me but didn’t want to admit it. He picked at the rock
absently with one fingernail, then shrugged and held it up again. “I want you
to believe the rock will fall and that the rock will not fall when I let go of
it.” He grinned.

 

I went to bed late that night. I had a nosebleed
and a smile of satisfaction. I held the two separate beliefs loosely in my mind
and let their singing discord lull me into senselessness.

Being able to think about two disparate things at
once, aside from being wonderfully efficient, was roughly akin to being able to
sing harmony with yourself. It turned into a favorite game of mine. After two
days of practicing I was able to sing a trio. Soon I was doing the mental
equivalent of palming cards and juggling knives.

There were many other lessons, though none were
quite so pivotal as the Alar. Ben taught me Heart of Stone, a mental exercise
that let you set aside your emotions and prejudices and let you think clearly
about whatever you wished. Ben said a man who truly mastered Heart of Stone
could go to his sister’s funeral without ever shedding a tear.

He also taught me a game called Seek the Stone. The
point of the game was to have one part of your mind hide an imaginary stone in
an imaginary room. Then you had another, separate part of your mind try to find
it.

Practically, it teaches valuable mental control. If
you can really play Seek the Stone, then you are developing an iron-hard Alar
of the sort you need for sympathy.

However, while being able to think about two things
at the same time is terribly convenient, the training it takes to get there is
frustrating at best, and at other times rather disturbing.

I remember one time I looked for the stone for
almost an hour before I consented to ask the other half of me where I’d hidden
it, only to find I hadn’t hidden the stone at all. I had merely been waiting to
see how long I would look before giving up. Have you ever been annoyed and
amused with yourself at the same time? It’s an interesting feeling, to say the
very least.

Another time I asked for hints and ended up jeering
at myself. It’s no wonder that many arcanists you meet are a little eccentric,
if not downright cracked. As Ben had said, sympathy is not for the weak of
mind.



CHAPTER NINE

Riding in the
Wagon with Ben

ABENTHY
WAS THE FIRST arcanist I ever met, a strange, exciting figure to a young boy.
He was knowledgeable in all the sciences: botany, astronomy, psychology,
anatomy, alchemy, geology, chemistry….

He was portly, with twinkling eyes that moved
quickly from one thing to another. He had a strip of dark grey hair running
around the back of his head, but (and this is what I remember most about him)
no eyebrows. Rather, he had them, but they were in a perpetual state of
regrowing from being burned off in the course of his alchemical pursuits. It
made him look surprised and quizzical all at once.

He spoke gently, laughed often, and never exercised
his wit at the expense of others. He cursed like a drunken sailor with a broken
leg, but only at his donkeys. They were called Alpha and Beta, and Abenthy fed
them carrots and lumps of sugar when he thought no one was looking. Chemistry
was his particular love, and my father said he’d never known a man to run a
better still.

By his second day in our troupe I was making a
habit of riding in his wagon. I would ask him questions and he would answer.
Then he would ask for songs and I would pluck them out for him on a lute I
borrowed from my father’s wagon.

He would even sing from time to time. He had a
bright, reckless tenor that was always wandering off, looking for notes in the
wrong places. More often than not he stopped and laughed at himself when it
happened. He was a good man, and there was no conceit in him.

Not long after he joined our troupe, I asked
Abenthy what it was like being an arcanist.

He gave me a thoughtful look. “Have you ever known
an arcanist?”

“We paid one to mend a cracked axle on the road
once.” I paused to think. “He was heading inland with a caravan of fish.”

Abenthy made a dismissive gesture. “No, no, boy.
I’m talking about arcanists. Not some poor
chill-charmer who works his way back and forth across caravan routes, trying to
keep fresh meat from rotting.”

“What’s the difference?” I asked, sensing it was
expected of me.

“Well,” he said. “That might take a bit of
explaining….”

“I’ve got nothing but time.”

Abenthy gave me an appraising look. I’d been
waiting for it. It was the look that said, “You don’t sound as young as you
look.” I hoped he’d come to grips with it fairly soon. It gets tiresome being
spoken to as if you are a child, even if you happen to be one.

He took a deep breath. “Just because someone knows
a trick or two doesn’t mean they’re an arcanist. They might know how to set a
bone or read Eld Vintic. Maybe they even know a little sympathy. But—”

“Sympathy?” I interrupted as politely as possible.

“You’d probably call it magic,” Abenthy said
reluctantly. “It’s not, really.” He shrugged. “But even knowing sympathy
doesn’t make you an arcanist. A true arcanist has worked his way through the
Arcanum at the University.”

At his mention of the Arcanum, I bristled with two
dozen new questions. Not so many, you might think, but when you added them to
the half-hundred questions I carried with me wherever I went, I was stretched
nearly to bursting. Only through a severe effort of will did I remain silent,
waiting for Abenthy to continue on his own.

Abenthy, however, noticed my reaction. “So, you’ve
heard about the Arcanum, have you?” He seemed amused. “Tell me what you’ve
heard, then.”

This small prompt was all the excuse I needed. “I
heard from a boy in Temper Glen that if your arm’s cut off they can sew it back
on at the University. Can they really? Some stories say Taborlin the Great went
there to learn the names of all things. There’s a library with a thousand
books. Are there really that many?”

He answered the last question, the others having
rushed by too quickly for him to respond. “More than a thousand, actually. Ten
times ten thousand books. More than that. More books than you could ever read.”
Abenthy’s voice grew vaguely wistful.

More books than I could read? Somehow I doubted
that.

Ben continued. “The people you see riding with
caravans—charmers who keep food from spoiling, dowsers, fortune-tellers, toad
eaters—aren’t real arcanists any more than all traveling performers are Edema
Ruh. They might know a little alchemy, a little sympathy, a little medicine.”
He shook his head. “But they’re not arcanists.

“A lot of people pretend to be. They wear robes and
put on airs to take advantage of the ignorant and gullible. But here’s how you
tell a true arcanist.”

Abenthy pulled a fine chain over his head and
handed it to me. It was the first time I had ever seen an Arcanum guilder. It
looked rather unimpressive, just a flat piece of lead with some unfamiliar
writing stamped onto it.

“That is a true gilthe.
Or guilder if you prefer,” Abenthy explained with some satisfaction. “It’s the
only sure way to be certain of who is and who isn’t an arcanist. Your father
asked to see mine before he let me ride with your troupe. It shows he’s a man
of the world.” He watched me with a sly disinterest. “Uncomfortable, isn’t it?”

I gritted my teeth and nodded. My hand had gone
numb as soon as I’d touched it. I was curious to study the markings on its
front and back, but after the space of two breaths, my arm was numb to the
shoulder, as if I had slept on it all night. I wondered if my whole body would
go numb if I held it long enough.

I was prevented from finding out, as the wagon hit
a bump and my numbed hand almost let Abenthy’s guilder fall to the footboard of
the wagon. He snatched it up and slipped it back over his head, chuckling.

“How can you stand it?” I asked, trying to rub a
little feeling back into my hand.

“It only feels that way to other people,” he
explained. “To its owner, it’s just warm. That’s how you can tell the
difference between an arcanist and someone who has a knack for finding water or
guessing at the weather.”

“Trip has something like that,” I said. “He rolls
sevens.”

“That’s a little different,” Abenthy laughed. “Not
anything so unexplainable as a knack.” He slouched a little farther down into
his seat. “Probably for the best. A couple hundred years ago, a person was good
as dead if folk saw he had a knack. The Tehlins called them demon signs, and
burned folk if they had them.” Abenthy’s mood seemed to have taken a downward
turn.

“We had to break Trip out of jail once or twice,” I
said, trying to lighten the tone of the conversation. “But no one actually
tried to burn him.”

Abenthy gave a tired smile. “I suspect Trip has a
pair of clever dice or an equally clever skill which probably extends to cards
as well. I thank you for your timely warning, but a knack is something else
entirely.”

I can’t abide being patronized. “Trip can’t cheat
to save his life,” I said a little more sharply than I had intended. “And
anyone in the troupe can tell good dice from bad. Trip throws sevens. It
doesn’t matter whose dice he uses, he rolls sevens. If he bets on someone, they
roll sevens. If he so much as bumps a table with loose dice on it, seven.”

“Hmmm.” Abenthy nodded to himself. “My apologies.
That does sound like a knack. I’d be curious to see it.”

I nodded. “Take your own dice. We haven’t let him
play for years.” A thought occurred to me. “It might not still work.”

He shrugged. “Knacks don’t go away so easily as
that. When I was growing up in Staup, I knew a young man with a knack.
Uncommonly good with plants.” Abenthy’s grin was gone as he looked off at
something I couldn’t see. “His tomatoes would be red while everyone else’s
vines were still climbing. His squash were bigger and sweeter, his grapes
didn’t hardly have to be bottled before they started being wine.” He trailed
off, his eyes far away.

“Did they burn him?” I asked with the morbid
curiosity of the young.

“What? No, of course not. I’m not that old.” He
scowled at me in mock severity. “There was a drought and he got run out of
town. His poor mother was heartbroken.”

There was a moment of silence. Two wagons ahead of
us, I heard Teren and Shandi rehearsing lines from The
Swineherd and the Nightingale.

Abenthy seemed to be listening as well, in an
offhand way. After Teren got himself lost halfway through Fain’s garden
monologue, I turned back to face him. “Do they teach acting at the University?”
I asked.

Abenthy shook his head, slightly amused by the
question. “Many things, but not that.”

I looked over at Abenthy and saw him watching me,
his eyes danced.

“Could you teach me some of those other things?” I
asked.

He smiled, and it was as easy as that.

 

Abenthy proceeded to give me a brief overview of
each of the sciences. While his main love was for chemistry, he believed in a
rounded education. I learned how to work the sextant, the compass, the
slipstick, the abacus. More important, I learned to do without.

Within a span I could identify any chemical in his
cart. In two months I could distill liquor until it was too strong to drink,
bandage a wound, set a bone, and diagnose hundreds of sicknesses from symptoms.
I knew the process for making four different aphrodisiacs, three concoctions
for contraception, nine for impotence, and two philtres referred to simply as
“maiden’s helper.” Abenthy was rather vague about the purpose of the last of
these, but I had some strong suspicions.

I learned the formulae for a dozen poisons and
acids and a hundred medicines and cure-alls, some of which even worked. I
doubled my herb lore in theory if not in practice. Abenthy started to call me
Red and I called him Ben, first in retaliation, then in friendship.

Only now, far after the fact, do I recognize how
carefully Ben prepared me for what was to come at the University. He did it
subtly. Once or twice a day, mixed in with my normal lectures, Ben would
present me with a little mental exercise I would have to master before we went
on to anything else. He made me play Tirani without a board, keeping track of
the stones in my head. Other times he would stop in the middle of a
conversation and make me repeat everything said in the last few minutes, word
for word.

This was levels beyond the simple memorization I
had practiced for the stage. My mind was learning to work in different ways,
becoming stronger. It felt the same way your body feels after a day of
splitting wood, or swimming, or sex. You feel exhausted, languorous, and almost
Godlike. This feeling was similar, except it was my intellect that was weary
and expanded, languid and latently powerful. I could feel my mind starting to
awaken.

I seemed to gain momentum as I progressed, like
when water starts to wash away a dam made of sand. I don’t know if you
understand what a geometric progression is, but that is the best way to
describe it. Through it all Ben continued to teach me mental exercises that I
was half convinced he constructed out of sheer meanness.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

Interlude—Autumn

KVOTHE
HELD OUT A hand to Chronicler, then turned to his student, frowning. “Stop
looking at me like that, Bast.”

Bast looked close to tears. “Oh, Reshi,” he choked
out. “I had no idea.”

Kvothe gestured as if cutting the air with the side
of his hand. “There’s no reason you should Bast, and no reason to make an issue
out of it.”

“But Reshi…”

Kvothe gave his student a severe look. “What, Bast?
Should I weep and tear my hair? Curse Tehlu and his angels? Beat my chest? No.
That is low drama.” His expression softened somewhat. “I appreciate your
concern, but this is just a piece of the story, not even the worst piece, and I
am not telling it to garner sympathy.”

Kvothe pushed his chair back from the table and
came to his feet. “Besides, all of this happened long ago.” He made a
dismissive gesture. “Time is the great healer, and so on.”

He rubbed his hands together. “Now, I’m going to
bring in enough wood to get us though the night. There’ll be a chill if I’m any
judge of weather. You can get a couple loaves ready to bake while I’m out, and
try to collect yourself. I refuse to tell the rest of this story with you
making blubbery cow eyes at me.”

With that, Kvothe walked behind the bar and out
through the kitchen toward the back door of the inn.

Bast scrubbed roughly at his eyes, then watched his
master go. “He’s fine so long as he’s busy,” Bast said softly.

“I beg your pardon?” Chronicler said reflexively.
He shifted awkwardly in his seat, as if he wanted to get to his feet, but
couldn’t think of a polite way to excuse himself.

Bast gave a warm smile, his eyes a human blue
again. “I was so excited when I heard who you were, that he was going to tell
his story. His mood’s been so dark lately, and there’s nothing to shake him out
of it, nothing to do but sit and brood. I’m sure that remembering the good
times will…” Bast grimaced. “I’m not saying this very well. I’m sorry for
earlier. I wasn’t thinking straight.”

“N–no,” Chronicler stammered hastily. “I’m the
one—it was my fault, I’m sorry.”

Bast shook his head. “You were just surprised, but
you only tried to bind me.” His expression grew a little pained. “Not that it
was pleasant, mind. It feels like being kicked between your legs, but all over
your body. It makes you feel sick, and weak, but it’s just pain. It wasn’t like
you’d actually wounded me.” Bast looked embarrassed. “I was going to do more
than hurt you. I might have killed you before I even stopped to think.”

Before an uncomfortable silence developed,
Chronicler said, “Why don’t we take his word that we were both suffering from
blinding idiocy, and leave it at that?” Chronicler managed a sickly smile that
was heartfelt in spite of the circumstances. “Peace?” he extended his hand.

“Peace.” They shook hands with much more genuine
warmth than they had earlier. As Bast reached across the table his sleeve
pulled back to reveal a bruise blossoming around his wrist.

Bast self-consciously pulled his cuff back into
place. “From when he grabbed me,” he said quickly. “He’s stronger than he
looks. Don’t mention it to him. He’ll only feel bad.”

 

Kvothe emerged from the kitchen and shut the door
behind himself. Looking around, he seemed surprised that it was a mild autumn
afternoon rather than the springtime forest of his story. He lifted the handles
of a flat-bottomed barrow and trundled it out into the woods behind the inn,
his feet crunching in the fallen leaves.

Not too far into the trees was the winter’s wood
supply. Cord on cord of oak and ash were stacked to make tall, crooked walls
between the trunks of trees. Kvothe tossed two pieces of firewood into the
wheelbarrow where they struck the bottom like a muted drum. Another two
followed them. His motions were precise, his face blank, his eyes far away.

As he continued to load the barrow, he moved slower
and slower, like a machine winding down. Eventually he stopped completely and
stood for a long minute, still as stone. Only then did his composure break. And
even with no one there to see, he hid his face in his hands and wept quietly,
his body wracked with wave on wave of heavy, silent sobs.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

Roads to Safe
Places

PERHAPS
THE GREATEST FACULTY our minds possess is the ability to cope with pain.
Classic thinking teaches us of the four doors of the mind, which everyone moves
through according to their need.

First is the door of sleep. Sleep offers us a
retreat from the world and all its pain. Sleep marks passing time, giving us
distance from the things that have hurt us. When a person is wounded they will
often fall unconscious. Similarly, someone who hears traumatic news will often
swoon or faint. This is the mind’s way of protecting itself from pain by
stepping through the first door.

Second is the door of forgetting. Some wounds are
too deep to heal, or too deep to heal quickly. In addition, many memories are
simply painful, and there is no healing to be done. The saying “time heals all wounds”
is false. Time heals most wounds. The rest are hidden behind this door.

Third is the door of madness. There are times when
the mind is dealt such a blow it hides itself in insanity. While this may not
seem beneficial, it is. There are times when reality is nothing but pain, and
to escape that pain the mind must leave reality behind.

Last is the door of death. The final resort.
Nothing can hurt us after we are dead, or so we have been told.

 

After my family was killed, I wandered deep into
the forest and slept. My body demanded it, and my mind used the first door to
dull the pain. The wound was covered until the proper time for healing could
come. In self-defense, a good portion of my mind simply stopped working—went to
sleep, if you will.

While my mind slept, many of the painful parts of
the previous day were ushered through the second door. Not completely. I did
not forget what had happened, but the memory was dulled, as if seen through
thick gauze. If I wanted to, I could have brought to memory the faces of the
dead, the memories of the man with black eyes. But I did not want to remember.
I pushed those thoughts away and let them gather dust in a seldom-used corner
of my mind.

I dreamed, not of blood, glassy eyes, and the smell
of burning hair, but of gentler things. And slowly the wound began to grow
numb….

 

I dreamed I was walking through the forest with
plain-faced Laclith, the woodsman who had traveled with our troupe when I was
younger. He walked silently through the underbrush while I kicked up more noise
than a wounded ox dragging an overturned cart.

After a long period of comfortable silence I
stopped to look at a plant. He came quietly up behind me. “Sagebeard,” he said.
“You can tell by the edge.” He reached past me and gently stroked the appropriate
part of the leaf. It did look like a beard. I nodded.

“This is willow. You can chew the bark to lessen
pains.” It was bitter and slightly gritty. “This is itchroot, don’t touch the
leaves.” I didn’t. “This is baneberry, the small fruits are safe to eat when
red but never when shading from green to yellow to orange.

“This is how you set your feet when you want to
walk silently.” It made my calves ache. “This is how you part the brush
quietly, leaving no sign of your passing. This is where you find the dry wood.
This is how you keep the rain off when you don’t have canvas. This is
paterroot. You can eat it but it tastes bad. These,” he gestured, “straightrod,
orangestripe, never eat them. The one with little knobs on it is burrum. You
should only eat it if you have just eaten something like straightrod. It will
make you keck up whatever’s in your stomach.

“This is how you set a snare that won’t kill a
rabbit. This snare will.” He looped the string first one way, then another.

As I watched his hands manipulate the string I
realized it was no longer Laclith, but Abenthy. We were riding in the wagon and
he was teaching me how to tie sailors’ knots.

“Knots are interesting things,” Ben said as he
worked. “The knot will either be the strongest or the weakest part of the rope.
It depends entirely on how well one makes the binding.” He held up his hands,
showing me an impossibly complex pattern spread between his fingers.

His eyes glittered. “Any questions?”

“Any questions?” my father said. We had stopped
early for the day because of a greystone. He sat tuning his lute and was
finally going to play his song for my mother and me. We had been waiting so
long. “Are there any questions?” he repeated, as he sat with his back against
the great grey stone.

“Why do we stop at the waystones?”

“Tradition mostly. But some people say they marked
old roads—” My father’s voice changed and became Ben’s voice, “—safe roads.
Sometimes roads to safe places, sometimes safe roads leading into danger.” Ben
held one hand out to it, as if feeling the warmth of a fire. “But there is a
power in them. Only a fool would deny that.”

Then Ben was no longer there, and there was not one
standing stone, but many. More than I had ever seen in one place before. They
formed a double circle around me. One stone was set across the top of two
others, forming a huge arch with thick shadow underneath. I reached out to
touch it….

And awoke. My mind had covered a fresh pain with
the names of a hundred roots and berries, four ways to light a fire, nine
snares made from nothing but a sapling and string, and where to find fresh
water.

I thought very little on the other matter of the
dream. Ben had never taught me sailors’ knots. My father had never finished his
song.

I took inventory of what I had with me: a canvas
sack, a small knife, a ball of string, some wax, a copper penny, two iron
shims, and Rhetoric and Logic, the book Ben had
given me. Aside from my clothes and my father’s lute, I had nothing else.

I set out looking for drinking water. “Water comes
first,” Laclith had told me. “Anything else you can do without for days.” I
considered the lay of the land and followed some animal trails. By the time I
found a small spring-fed pool nestled among some birch trees, I could see the
sky purpling into dusk behind the trees. I was terribly thirsty, but caution
won out and I took only a small drink.

Next I collected dry wood from the hollows of trees
and under canopies. I set a simple snare. I hunted for and found several stalks
of motherleaf and spread the sap onto my fingers where they were bloody and
torn. The stinging helped distract me from remembering how I had hurt them.

Waiting for the sap to dry, I took my first casual
look around. Oaks and birches crowded each other for space. Their trunks made
patterns of alternating light and dark beneath the canopy of branches. A small
rivulet ran from the pool across some rocks and away to the east. It may have
been beautiful, but I didn’t notice. I couldn’t notice. To me the trees were
shelter, the undergrowth a source of nourishment, and the pool reflecting
moonlight only reminded me of my thirst.

There was also a great rectangular stone lying on
its side near the pool. A few days earlier I would have recognized it as a
greystone. Now I saw it as an efficient windbreak, something to put my back
against as I slept.

Through the canopy I saw the stars were out. That
meant it had been several hours since I had tried the water. Since it hadn’t
made me sick, I decided it must be safe and took a long drink.

Rather than refreshing me, all my drink did was
make me aware of how hungry I was. I sat on the stone by the edge of the pool.
I stripped the leaves from the stalks of motherleaf and ate one. It was rough,
papery, and bitter. I ate the rest, but it didn’t help. I took another drink of
water, then lay down to sleep, not caring that the stone was cold and hard, or
at least pretending not to care.

 

I awoke, took a drink, and went to check the snare
I had set. I was surprised to find a rabbit already struggling against the
cord. I took out my small knife and remembered how Laclith had shown me to
dress a rabbit. Then I thought of the blood and how it would feel on my hands.
I felt sick and vomited. I cut loose the rabbit and walked back to the pool.

I took another drink of water and sat on the stone.
I felt a little light-headed and wondered if it was from hunger.

After a moment my head cleared and I chided myself
for my foolishness. I found some shelf fungus growing on a dead tree and ate it
after washing it in the pool. It was gritty and tasted like dirt. I ate all I
could find.

I set a new snare, one that would kill. Then,
smelling rain in the air, I returned to the greystone to make a shelter for my
lute.



CHAPTER NINETEEN

Fingers and
Strings

IN
THE BEGINNING I was almost like an automaton, thoughtlessly performing the
actions that would keep me alive.

I ate the second rabbit I caught, and the third. I
found a patch of wild strawberries. I dug for roots. By the end of the fourth
day, I had everything I needed to survive: a stone-lined fire pit, a shelter
for my lute. I had even assembled a small stockpile of foodstuffs that I could
fall back on in case of emergency.

I also had one thing I did not need: time. After I
had taken care of immediate needs, I found I had nothing to do. I think this is
when a small part of my mind started to slowly reawaken itself.

Make no mistake, I was not myself. At least I was
not the same person I had been a span of days before. Everything I did I
attended to with my whole mind, leaving no part of me free for remembering.

I grew thinner and more ragged. I slept in rain or
sun, on soft grass, moist earth, or sharp stones with an intensity of
indifference that only grief can promote. The only notice I took of my
surroundings was when it rained, because then I could not bring out my lute to
play, and that pained me.

Of course I played. It was my only solace.

By the end of the first month, my fingers had
calluses hard as stones and I could play for hours upon hours. I played and
played again all of the songs I knew from memory. Then I played the
half-remembered songs as well, filling in the forgotten parts as best I could.

Eventually I could play from when I woke until the
time I slept. I stopped playing the songs I knew and started inventing new
ones. I had made up songs before; I had even helped my father compose a verse
or two. But now I gave it my whole attention. Some of those songs have stayed
with me to this day.

Soon after that I began playing…how can I describe
it?

I began to play something other than songs. When
the sun warms the grass and the breeze cools you, it feels a certain way. I
would play until I got the feeling right. I would play until it sounded like
Warm Grass and Cool Breeze.

I was only playing for myself, but I was a harsh
audience. I remember spending nearly three whole days trying to capture Wind
Turning a Leaf.

By the end of the second month, I could play things
nearly as easily as I saw and felt them: Sun Setting Behind the Clouds, Bird
Taking a Drink, Dew in the Bracken.

Somewhere in the third month I stopped looking
outside and started looking inside for things to play. I learned to play Riding
in the Wagon with Ben, Singing with Father by the Fire, Watching Shandi Dance,
Grinding Leaves When it Is Nice Outside, Mother Smiling….

Needless to say, playing these things hurt, but it
was a hurt like tender fingers on lute strings. I bled a bit and hoped that I
would callous soon.

 

Toward the end of summer, one of the strings broke,
broke beyond repair. I spent the better part of the day in a mute stupor,
unsure of what to do. My mind was still numb and mostly asleep. I focused with
a dim shadow of my usual cleverness on my problem. After realizing that I could
neither make a string nor acquire a new one, I sat back down and began to learn
to play with only six strings.

In a span I was nearly as good with six strings as
I had been with seven. Three span later I was trying to play Waiting While it
Rains when a second string broke.

This time I didn’t hesitate, I stripped off the
useless string and started to learn again.

It was midway through Reaping when the third string
broke. After trying for nearly half a day, I realized that three broken strings
were too many. So I packed a small dull knife, half a ball of string, and Ben’s
book into a tattered canvas sack. Then I shouldered my father’s lute and began
to walk.

I tried humming Snow Falling with the Late Autumn
Leaves; Calloused Fingers and a Lute With Four Strings, but it wasn’t the same
as playing it.

 

My plan was to find a road and follow it to a town.
I had no idea how far I was from either, in which direction they might lie, or
what their names might be. I knew I was somewhere in the southern Commonwealth,
but the precise location was buried, tangled up with other memories that I was
not eager to unearth.

The weather helped me make up my mind. Cool autumn
was turning to winter’s chill. I knew the weather was warmer to the south. So,
lacking any better plan, I set the sun on my left shoulder and tried to cover
as much distance as I could.

The next span was an ordeal. The little food I’d brought
with me was soon gone, and I had to stop and forage when I was hungry. Some
days I couldn’t find water, and when I did I had nothing I could use to carry
it. The small wagon track joined a bigger road, which joined a larger road yet.
My feet chafed and blistered against the insides of my shoes. Some nights were
bitter cold.

There were inns, but aside from the occasional
drink I stole from horse troughs, I gave them a wide berth. There were a few
small towns as well, but I needed someplace larger. Farmers have no need for
lute strings.

At first, whenever I heard a wagon or a horse
approaching I found myself limping off to hide by the side of the road. I had
not spoken with another human since the night my family was killed. I was more
akin to a wild animal than a boy of twelve. But eventually the road became too
large and well traveled, and I found myself spending more time hiding than
walking. I finally braved the traffic and was relieved when I was largely
ignored.

 

I had been walking for less than an hour one
morning when I heard a wagon coming up behind me. The road was wide enough for
two wagons to run abreast, but I moved to the grass at the edge of the road
anyway.

“Hey, boy!” a rough male voice behind me yelled. I
didn’t turn around. “Hullo, boy!”

I moved farther off the road into the grass without
looking behind me. I kept my eyes on the ground beneath my feet.

The wagon pulled slowly alongside me. The voice
bellowed twice as loud as before, “Boy. Boy!”

I looked up and saw a weathered old man squinting
against the sun. He could have been anywhere from forty to seventy years old.
There was a thick-shouldered, plain-faced young man sitting next to him on the
wagon. I guessed they were father and son.

“Are ye deaf, boy?” The old man pronounced it deef.

I shook my head.

“Ye dumb then?”

I shook my head again. “No.” It felt strange
talking to someone. My voice sounded odd, rough and rusty from disuse.

He squinted at me. “You goin’ into the city?”

I nodded, not wanting to talk again.

“Get in then.” He nodded toward the back of the
wagon. “Sam won’t mind pulling a little whippet like yuself.” He patted the
rump of his mule.

It was easier to agree than run away. And the
blisters on my feet were stinging from the sweat in my shoes. I moved to the
back of the open cart and climbed on, pulling my lute after me. The back of the
open wagon was about three-quarters full of large burlap bags. A few round,
knobby squash had spilled from an open sack and were rolling aimlessly around
on the floor.

The old man shook the reins. “Hup!” and the mule
grudgingly picked up its pace. I picked up the few loose squash and tucked them
into the bag that had fallen open. The old farmer gave me a smile over his
shoulder. “Thanks, boy. I’m Seth, and this here is Jake. You might want to be
sittin’ down, a bad bump could tip ye over the side.” I sat on one of the bags,
tense for no good reason, not knowing what to expect.

The old farmer handed the reins to his son and
brought a large brown loaf of bread out of a sack that sat between the two of
them. He casually tore off a large chunk, spread a thick dab of butter onto it,
and handed it back to me.

This casual kindness made my chest ache. It had
been half a year since I had eaten bread. It was soft and warm and the butter
was sweet. I saved a piece for later, tucking it into my canvas sack.

After a quiet quarter of an hour, the old man
turned halfway around. “Do you play that thing, boy?” He gestured to the lute
case.

I clutched it closer to my body. “It’s broken.”

“Ah,” he said, disappointed. I thought he was going
to ask me to get off, but instead he smiled and nodded to the man beside him.
“We’ll just have to be entertainin’ you instead.”

He started to sing “Tinker Tanner,” a drinking song
that is older than God. After a second his son joined in, and their rough
voices made a simple harmony that set something inside me aching as I
remembered other wagons, different songs, a half-forgotten home.



CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

Basement, Bread
and Bucket

IT
WAS JUST AFTER lunchtime. Rather, it would have been after lunchtime if I’d had
anything to eat. I was begging in Merchant’s Circle and so far the day had
profited me two kicks (one guard, one mercenary), three shoves (two wagoneers,
one sailor), one new curse concerning an unlikely anatomical configuration
(also from the sailor), and a spray of spittle from a rather unendearing
elderly man of indeterminate occupation.

And one iron shim. Though I attributed it more to
the laws of probability than from any human kindness. Even a blind pig finds an
acorn once in a while.

I had been living in Tarbean for nearly a month,
and the day before I had tried my hand at stealing for the first time. It was
an inauspicious beginning. I’d been caught with my hand in a butcher’s pocket.
This had earned me such a tremendous blow to the side of the head that today I
was dizzy when I tried to stand or move about quickly. Hardly encouraged by my
first foray into thievery, I had decided that today was a begging day. As such,
it was about average.

Hunger knotted my stomach, and a single shim’s
worth of stale bread wasn’t going to help much. I was considering moving to a
different street when I saw a boy run up to a younger beggar across the way.
They talked excitedly for a moment then hurried off.

I followed of course, showing a pale shadow of my
former burning curiosity. Besides, anything that moved the two of them away
from a busy street corner in the middle of the day was bound to be worth my
while. Maybe the Tehlins were giving out bread again. Or a fruit cart had
tipped over. Or the guard was hanging someone. That would be worth half an hour
of my time.

I followed the boys through the twisting streets
until I saw them turn a corner and scurry down a flight of stairs into the
basement of a burned-out building. I stopped, my dim spark of curiosity
smothered by my common sense.

A moment later they reappeared, each carrying a
chunk of flat brown bread. I watched as they wandered past, laughing and
shoving at each other. The youngest, no more than six, saw me looking and
waved.

“Still some left,” he called through a mouthful of
bread. “Better hurrup though.”

My common sense did a rapid turnaround, and I
headed cautiously downward. At the bottom of the steps were a few rotting
planks, all that remained of a broken door. Inside I could see a short hallway
opening out into a dimly lit room. A young girl with hard eyes pushed past me
without looking up. She clutched another piece of bread.

I stepped over the broken pieces of door into the
chill, damp dark. After a dozen steps I heard a low moan that froze me where I stood.
It was almost an animal sound, but my ear told me it came from a human throat.

I don’t know what I expected, but it was nothing
like what I found. Two ancient lamps burned fish oil, throwing dim shadows
against the dark stone walls. There were six cots in the room, all occupied.
Two children that were hardly more than babies shared a blanket on the stone
floor, and another was curled up in a pile of rags. A boy my age sat in a dark
corner, his head pressed against the wall.

One of the boys moved slightly on his cot, as if
stirring in his sleep. But something was wrong with the movement. It was too
strained, too tense. I looked closer and saw the truth. He was tied to the cot.
All of them were.

He strained against the ropes and made the noise I
had heard in the hall. It was clearer now, a long moaning cry.
“Aaaaaaabaaaaaaah.”

For a moment all I could do was think about every
story I had ever heard about the Duke of Gibea. About how he and his men had
abducted and tortured people for twenty years before the church had gone in and
put an end to it.

“What what,” came a voice from the other room. The
voice had an odd inflection to it, as if it wasn’t really asking a question.

The boy on the cot jerked against his ropes.
“Aaaahbeeeeh.”

A man came through the doorway brushing his hands
on the front of his tattered robe. “What what,” he repeated in the same
not-questioning tone. His voice was old and tired around the edges, but at its
center it was patient. Patient as a heavy stone or a mother cat with kittens. Not
the sort of voice I expected a Duke-of-Gibea type to have.

“What what. Hush hush, Tanee. I wan’t gone, just
stepped away. Now I’m here.” His feet made slapping sounds against the bare
stone floor. He was barefoot. I felt the tension slowly spill out of me.
Whatever was going on here, it didn’t seem nearly as sinister as I had
originally thought.

The boy stopped straining against the ropes when he
saw the man approaching. “Eeeeeeaah.” He said, and tugged against the ropes
restraining him.

“What?” It was a question this time.

“Eeeeeeaah.”

“Hmmm?” The old man looked around and saw me for
the first time. “Oh. Hello.” He looked back to the boy on the bed. “Well aren’t
you the clever one today? Tanee called me in to see we have a visitor!” Tanee’s
face broke into a terrific grin and he gave a harsh, honking gasp of breath. In
spite of the painful sound, it was clear he was laughing.

Turning to look at me, the barefoot man said, “I
don’t recognize you. Have you been here before?”

I shook my head.

“Well, I’ve got some bread, only two days old. If
you carry some water for me, you can have as much as you can eat.” He looked at
me. “Does that sound all right?”

I nodded. A chair, table, and an open barrel
standing near one of the doors were the only furnishings in the room aside from
the cots. Four large, round loaves were stacked on the table.

He nodded too, then began to move carefully toward
the chair. He walked gingerly, as if it pained him to set his feet down.

After he reached the chair and sank into it, he
pointed to the barrel by the doorway. “Through the door there’s a pump and
bucket. Don’t bother to hurry, it’s na a race.” As he spoke he absentmindedly
crossed his legs and began to rub one of his bare feet.

Inefficient circulation,
a long-unused part of me thought. Increased risk of
infection and considerable discomfort. Feet and legs should be raised,
massaged, and swabbed in a warm infusion of willow bark, camphor, and
arrowroot.

“Don’t fill the bucket too full. I don’t want you
to hurt yourself or spill all over. It’s wet enough down here.” He eased his
foot back to the floor and bent to gather up one of the tiny children who was
beginning to stir restlessly on the blanket.

As I filled the barrel I snuck glances at the man.
His hair was grey, but despite that and the slow, tender manner in which he
walked, he wasn’t very old. Perhaps forty, probably a little less. He wore a
long robe, patched and mended to such a degree that I couldn’t really guess at
its original color or shape. Though nearly as ragged as I was, he was cleaner.
Which isn’t to say that he was clean exactly, just cleaner than me. It wasn’t
hard to be.

His name was Trapis. The patched robe was the only
piece of clothing he owned. He spent nearly every moment of his waking life in
that damp basement caring for the hopeless people no one else would bother
with. Most of them were young boys. Some, like Tanee, had to be restrained so
they wouldn’t hurt themselves or roll out of their beds. Others, like Jaspin
who had gone fever-mad two years ago, had to be restrained so they wouldn’t
hurt others.

Palsied, crippled, catatonic, spastic, Trapis
tended them all with equal and unending patience. I never once heard him
complain of anything, not even his bare feet, which were always swollen and
must have pained him constantly.

He gave us children what help he could, a bit of
food when he had some to spare. To earn a little something to eat we carried
water, scrubbed his floor, ran errands, and held the babies so they wouldn’t
cry. We did whatever he asked, and when there wasn’t any food we could always
have a drink of water, a tired smile, and someone who looked at us as if we
were human, not animals in rags.

Sometimes it seemed that Trapis alone was trying to
care for all the hopeless creatures in our corner of Tarbean. In return we
loved him with a silent ferocity that only animals can match. If anyone had
ever raised a hand to Trapis, a hundred howling children would have torn them
to bloody scraps in the middle of the street.

I stopped by his basement often in those first few
months, then less and less as time went by. Trapis and Tanee were fine
companions. None of us felt the need to talk much, and that suited me fine. But
the other street children made me unspeakably nervous, so I visited
infrequently, only when I was in desperate need of help, or when I had
something to share.

Despite the fact that I was seldom there, it was
good to know there was one place in the city where I wouldn’t be kicked at,
chased, or spit on. It helped when I was out on the rooftops alone, knowing
that Trapis and the basement were there. It was almost like a home you could
come back to. Almost.



CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

Interlude—Eager
for Reasons

KVOTHE
GESTURED FOR CHRONICLER to set down his pen and stretched, lacing his fingers
together above his head. “It’s been a long time since I remembered that,” he
said. “If you are eager to find the reason I became the Kvothe they tell
stories about, you could look there, I suppose.”

Chronicler’s forehead wrinkled. “What do you mean,
exactly?”

Kvothe paused for a long moment, looking down at
his hands. “Do you know how many times I’ve been beaten over the course of my
life?”

Chronicler shook his head.

Looking up, Kvothe grinned and tossed his shoulders
in a nonchalant shrug. “Neither do I. You’d think that sort of thing would
stick in a person’s mind. You’d think I would remember how many bones I’ve had
broken. You’d think I’d remember the stitches and bandages.” He shook his head.
“I don’t. I remember that young boy sobbing in the dark. Clear as a bell after
all these years.”

Chronicler frowned. “You said yourself that there
was nothing you could have done.”

“I could have,” Kvothe said seriously, “and I
didn’t. I made my choice and I regret it to this day. Bones mend. Regret stays
with you forever.”

Kvothe pushed himself away from the table. “That’s
enough of Tarbean’s darker side, I imagine.” He came to his feet and gave a
great stretch, arms over his head.

“Why, Reshi?” The words poured out of Bast in a
sudden gush. “Why did you stay there when it was so awful?”

Kvothe nodded to himself, as if he had been
expecting the question. “Where else was there for me to go, Bast? Everyone I
knew was dead.”

“Not everyone,” Bast insisted. “There was Abenthy.
You could have gone to him.”

“Hallowfell was hundreds of miles away, Bast,”
Kvothe said wearily as he wandered to the other side of the room and moved
behind the bar. “Hundreds of miles without my father’s maps to guide me.
Hundreds of miles without wagons to ride or sleep in. Without help of any sort,
or money, or shoes. Not an impossible journey, I suppose. But for a young child,
still numb with the shock of losing his parents….”

Kvothe shook his head. “No. In Tarbean at least I
could beg or steal. I’d managed to survive in the forest for a summer, barely.
But over the winter?” He shook his head. “I would have starved or frozen to
death.”

Standing at the bar, Kvothe filled his mug and
began to add pinches of spice from several small containers, then walked toward
the great stone fireplace, a thoughtful expression on his face. “You’re right,
of course. Anywhere would have been better than Tarbean.”

He shrugged, facing the fire. “But we are all
creatures of habit. It is far too easy to stay in the familiar ruts we dig for
ourselves. Perhaps I even viewed it as fair. My punishment for not being there
to help when the Chandrian came. My punishment for not dying when I should
have, with the rest of my family.”

Bast opened his mouth, then closed it and looked
down at the tabletop, frowning.

Kvothe looked over his shoulder and gave a gentle
smile. “I’m not saying it’s rational, Bast. Emotions by their very nature are
not reasonable things. I don’t feel that way now, but back then I did. I
remember.” He turned back to the fire. “Ben’s training has given me a memory so
clean and sharp I have to be careful not to cut myself sometimes.”

Kvothe took a mulling stone from the fire and
dropped it into his wooden mug. It sank with a sharp hiss. The smell of searing
clove and nutmeg filled the room.

Kvothe stirred his cider with a long-handled spoon
as he made his way back to the table. “You must also remember that I was not in
my right mind. Much of me was still in shock, sleeping if you will. I needed
something, or someone, to wake me up.”

He nodded to Chronicler, who casually shook his
writing hand to loosen it, then unstoppered his inkwell.

Kvothe leaned back in his seat. “I needed to be
reminded of things I had forgotten. I needed a reason to leave. It was years
before I met someone who could do those things.” He smiled at Chronicler.
“Before I met Skarpi.”



CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

Shadows Themselves

THROUGH
ALL MY TIME in Tarbean, I continued to learn, though most of the lessons were
painful and unpleasant.

I learned how to beg. It was a very practical
application of acting with a very difficult audience. I did it well, but
Waterside money was tight and an empty begging bowl meant a cold, hungry night.

Through dangerous trial and error I discovered the
proper way to slit a purse and pick a pocket. I was especially good at the
latter. Locks and latches of all kinds soon gave up their secrets to me. My
nimble fingers were put to a use my parents or Abenthy never would have
guessed.

I learned to run from anyone with an unnaturally
white smile. Denner resin slowly bleaches your teeth, so if a sweet-eater lives
long enough for their teeth to grow fully white, chances are they have already
sold everything they have worth selling. Tarbean is full of dangerous people,
but none as dangerous as a sweet-eater filled with the desperate craving for
more resin. They will kill you for a pair of pennies.

I learned how to lash together makeshift shoes out
of rags. Real shoes became a thing of dreams for me. The first two years it
seemed like my feet were always cold, or cut, or both. But by the third year my
feet were like old leather and I could run barefoot for hours over the rough
stones of the city and not feel it at all.

I learned not to expect help from anyone. In the
bad parts of Tarbean a call for help attracts predators like the smell of blood
on the wind. I was sleeping on the rooftops, snugged tightly into my secret
place where three roofs met. I awoke from a deep sleep to the sound of harsh
laughter and pounding feet in the alley below me.

The slapping footsteps stopped and more laughter
followed the sound of ripping cloth. Slipping to the edge of the roof, I looked
down to the alley below. I saw several large boys, almost men. They were
dressed as I was, rags and dirt. There may have been five, maybe six of them.
They moved in and out of the shadows like shadows themselves. Their chests
heaved from their run and I could hear their breath from the roof above.

The object of the chase was in the middle of the
alley: a young boy, eight years old at the most. One of the older boys was
holding him down. The young boy’s bare skin shone pale in the moonlight. There
was another sound of ripping cloth, and the boy gave a soft cry that ended in a
choked sob.

The others watched and talked in low urgent tones
with each other, wearing hard, hungry smiles.

I’d been chased before at night, several times. I’d
been caught too, months ago. Looking down, I was surprised to find a heavy red
roof tile in my hand, ready to throw.

Then I paused, looking back to my secret place. I
had a rag blanket and a half a loaf of bread there. My rainy-day money was
hidden here, eight iron pennies I had hoarded for when my luck turned bad. And
most valuable of all, Ben’s book. I was safe here. Even if I hit one of them,
the rest would be on the roof in two minutes. Then, even if I got away, I
wouldn’t have anywhere to go.

I set down the tile. I went back to what had become
my home, and curled myself into the shelter of the niche underneath the
overhanging roof. I twisted my blanket in my hands and clenched my teeth,
trying to shut out the low rumble of conversation punctuated by coarse laughter
and quiet, hopeless sobbing from below.



CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

His Eyes Unveiled

I
LEFT THE BAR smiling, unmindful of the fact that I was still Dockside and in
danger. I felt buoyant knowing I would have the chance to hear another story
soon. It had been a long time since I had looked forward to anything. I went
back to my street corner and proceeded to waste three hours begging, not
gaining so much as a thin shim for my efforts. Even this failed to dampen my
spirits. Tomorrow was Mourning, but the day after there would be stories!

But as I sat there, I felt a vague unease creep
over me. A feeling that I was forgetting something impinged on my too-rare
happiness. I tried to ignore it, but it stayed with me all day and into the
next, like a mosquito I couldn’t see, let alone swat. By the end of the day, I
was certain I had forgotten something. Something about the story Skarpi had
told.

It is easy for you to see, no doubt, hearing the
story like this, conveniently arranged and narrated. Keep in mind that I had
been living like an animal in Tarbean for nearly three years. Pieces of my mind
were still asleep, and my painful memories had been gathering dust behind the
door of forgetfulness. I had grown used to avoiding them, the same way a
cripple keeps weight off an injured leg.

Luck smiled on me the next day, and I managed to
steal a bundle of rags off the back of a wagon and sell them to a ragman for
four iron pennies. Too hungry to worry about tomorrow, I bought a thick slice
of cheese and a warm sausage, then a whole loaf of fresh bread and a warm apple
tart. Finally, on a whim, I went to the back door of the nearby inn and spent
my final penny on a mug of strong beer.

I sat on the steps of a bakery across the street
from the inn and watched people coming and going as I enjoyed my best meal in
months. Soon twilight faded into darkness and my head began to spin pleasantly
from the beer. But as the food settled in my belly, the nagging sensation
returned, stronger than before. I frowned, irritated that something would spoil
an otherwise perfect day.

Night deepened until the inn across the street
stood in a pool of light. A few women hovered near the doorway to the inn. They
murmured in low voices and gave knowing looks to the men who walked past.

I drank off the last of the beer and was about to
cross the street and return the mug when I saw a flicker of torchlight
approaching. Looking down the street, I saw the distinctive grey of a Tehlin
priest and decided to wait until he had passed. Drunk on Mourning and just
recently a thief, I guessed the less contact I had with the clergy the better
off I’d be.

He was hooded, and the torch he carried was between
us, so I couldn’t see his face. He approached the group of nearby women and
there was a low murmur of discussion. I heard the distinctive chink of coins
and sunk further into the shadow of the doorway.

The Tehlin turned and headed back the way he had
come. I remained still, not wanting to draw his attention, not wanting to have
to run for safety while my head was spinning. This time, however, the torch was
not between us. When he turned to look in my direction, I could see nothing of
his face, only darkness under the cowl of his hood, only shadow.

He continued on his way, unaware of my presence, or
uncaring. But I stayed where I was, unable to move. The image of the hooded man,
his face hidden in shadow, had thrown open a door in my mind and memories were
spilling out. I was remembering a man with empty eyes and a smile from a
nightmare, remembering the blood on his sword. Cinder, his voice like a chill
wind: “Is this your parent’s fire?”

Not him, the man behind him. The quiet one who had
sat beside the fire. The man whose face was hidden in shadow. Haliax. This had
been the half-remembered thing hovering on the edge of my awareness since I had
heard Skarpi’s story.

I ran to the rooftops and wrapped myself in my rag
blanket. Pieces of story and memory slowly fit together. I began to admit
impossible truths to myself. The Chandrian were real. Haliax was real. If the
story Skarpi had told was true, then Lanre and Haliax were the same person. The
Chandrian had killed my parents, my whole troupe. Why?

Other memories bubbled to the surface of my mind. I
saw the man with black eyes, Cinder, kneeling in front of me. His face
expressionless, his voice sharp and cold. “Someone’s parents,” he had said,
“have been singing entirely the wrong sort of songs.”

They had killed my parents for gathering stories
about them. They had killed my whole troupe over a song. I sat awake all night
with little more than these thoughts running through my head. Slowly I came to
realize them as the truth.

What did I do then? Did I swear I would find them,
kill them all for what they had done? Perhaps. But even if I did, I knew in my
heart it was impossible. Tarbean had taught me hard practicality. Kill the
Chandrian? Kill Lanre? How could I even begin? I would have more luck trying to
steal the moon. At least I knew where to look for the moon at night.

But there was one thing I could do. Tomorrow I
would ask Skarpi for the real truth behind his stories. It wasn’t much, but it
was all I had. Revenge might be beyond me, at least for now. But I still had a
hope of knowing the truth.

I held tight to that hope through the dark hours of
night, until the sun rose and I fell asleep.



CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE

The Doors of My
Mind

UP
ONTO THE ROOFTOPS and back to my secret place, I wrapped myself in my blanket
and cried. I cried as if something inside me had broken and everything was
rushing out.

When I had worn myself out with sobbing it was deep
into the night. I lay there looking at the sky, weary but unable to sleep. I
thought of my parents and of the troupe, and was surprised to find the memories
less bitter than before.

For the first time in years, I used one of the
tricks Ben had taught me for calming and sharpening the mind. It was harder
than I remembered, but I did it.

If you have ever slept the whole night without
moving, then awoke in the morning, your body stiff with inaction. If you can
remember how that first terrific stretch feels, pleasant and painful, then you
may understand how my mind felt after all these years, stretching awake on the
rooftops of Tarbean.

I spent the rest of that night opening the doors of
my mind. Inside I found things long forgotten: my mother fitting words together
for a song, diction for the stage, three recipes for tea to calm nerves and
promote sleep, finger scales for the lute.

My music. Had it really been years since I held a
lute?

I spent a long time thinking about the Chandrian,
about what they had done to my troupe, what they had taken from me. I remembered
blood and the smell of burning hair and felt a deep, sullen anger burning in my
chest. I will admit I thought dark, vengeful thoughts that night.

But my years in Tarbean had instilled an iron-hard
practicality. I knew revenge was nothing more than a childish fantasy. I was
fifteen. What could I possibly do?

I did know one thing. It had come to me as I lay
remembering. It was something Haliax had said to Cinder. Who
keeps you safe from the Amyr? The singers? The Sithe? From all that would harm
you in the world?

The Chandrian had enemies. If I could find them,
they would help me. I had no idea who the singers or the Sithe were, but
everyone knew that the Amyr were church knights, the strong right hand of the
Aturan Empire. Unfortunately, everyone also knew that there had been no Amyr in
three hundred years. They had been disbanded when the Aturan Empire collapsed.

But Haliax had spoken of them as if they still
existed. And Skarpi’s story implied that the Amyr had begun with Selitos, not
with the Aturan Empire as I had always been taught. There was obviously more to
the story, more that I needed to know.

The more I thought on it, the more questions arose.
The Chandrian obviously didn’t kill everyone who gathered stories or sang songs
about them. Everyone knew a story or two about them, and every child at one
point has sung the silly rhyme about their signs. What made my parent’s song so
different?

I had questions. There was only one place for me to
go, of course.

I looked over my meager possessions. I had a rag
blanket and a burlap sack with some straw that I used for a pillow. I had a
pint bottle with a cork in it, half full of clean water. A piece of canvas
sailcloth that I weighted down with bricks and used as a windbreak on cold
nights. A crude pair of salt-dice and a single, tatty shoe that was too small
for me, but that I hoped to trade for something else.

And twenty-seven iron pennies in common coin. My
rainy-day money. A few days ago it had seemed like a vast treasure trove, but
now I knew it would never be enough.

As the sun was rising, I removed Rhetoric and Logic from its hiding place underneath a
rafter. I unwrapped the scrap of treated canvas I used to protect it and was
relieved to find it dry and well. I felt the smooth leather in my hands. I held
it to my face and smelled the back of Ben’s wagon, spice and yeast with the
bitter tang of acids and chemical salts mingled in. It was the last tangible
piece of my past.

I opened it to the first page and read the
inscription Ben had made more than three years ago.



Kvothe,





Defend yourself
well at the University. Make me proud.





Remember your
father’s song. Be wary of folly.





Abenthy.



I nodded to myself and turned the page.



CHAPTER THIRTY

The Broken
Binding

THE
SIGN OVER THE doorpost read: THE BROKEN BINDING. I took it to be an auspicious
sign and walked in.

A man sat behind a desk. I assumed he was the
owner. He was tall and reedy with thinning hair. He looked up from a ledger,
his expression vaguely irritated.

Deciding to keep niceties to a minimum, I walked to
his desk and handed him the book. “How much would you give me for this?”

He leafed through it professionally, feeling the
paper between his fingers, checking the binding. He shrugged. “A couple of
jots.”

“It’s worth more than that!” I said indignantly.

“It’s worth what you can get for it,” he said
matter-of-factly. “I’ll give you one and a half.”

“Two talents and I have the option to buy it back
for a month.”

He gave a short, barking laugh. “This is not a
pawnshop.” He slid the book across the desk toward me with one hand as he
picked up his pen with the other.

“Twenty days?”

He hesitated, then gave the book another cursory
once-over and brought out his purse. He pulled out two heavy silver talents. It
was more money than I’d seen in one place for a long, long time.

He slid them across the desk. I restrained the
desire to snatch them up immediately and said, “I’ll need a receipt.”

This time he gave me such a long hard look that I
began to get a little nervous. It was only then I realized how I must look,
covered in a year’s worth of alley dirt, trying to get a receipt for a book I’d
obviously stolen.

Eventually he gave another bland shrug and
scratched out a note on a slip of paper. At the bottom of it he drew a line and
made a motion with his pen. “Sign here.”

I looked at the paper. It read:

 

I, by signing below, hereby
attest to the fact that I can neither read nor write.

 

I looked up at the owner. He held a straight face.
I dipped the pen and carefully wrote the letters “D D” as if they were initials.

He fanned the ink dry and slid my “receipt” across
the desk toward me. “What does D stand for?” he asked with the barest hint of a
smile.

“Defeasance,” I said. “It means to render something
null and void, usually a contract. The second D is for Decrepitate. Which is
the act of throwing someone into a fire.” He gave me a blank look.
“Decrepication is the punishment for forgery in Junpui. I think false receipts
fall in that category.”

I made no move to touch the money or the receipt.
There was a tense silence.

“This isn’t Junpui,” he said, his face carefully
composed.

“True enough,” I admitted. “You have a keen sense
of defalcation. Perhaps I should add a third D.”

He gave another sharp, barking laugh and smiled.
“You’ve convinced me, young master.” He pulled out a fresh slip of paper and
set it in front of me. “You write me a receipt, and I will sign it.”

I took up the pen and wrote. “I the undersigned, do
agree to return the copy of the book Rhetoric and Logic
with the inscription “to Kvothe” to the bearer of this note in exchange for two
silver pennies, provided he present this receipt before the date—”

I looked up. “What day is it?”

“Shuden. The thirty-fifth.”

I had fallen out of the habit of keeping track of
the date. On the streets, one day is largely the same as the next, save that
people are a little more drunk on Hepten, a little more generous on Mourning.

But if it was the thirty-fifth then I only had five
days to get to the University. I knew from Ben that admissions only lasted
until Cendling. If I missed them, I would have to wait two months for the next
term to start.

I filled in the date on the receipt and drew a line
for the bookseller to sign. He looked a little bemused as I slid the paper
toward him. What’s more, he didn’t notice that the receipt read pennies instead
of talents. Talents were worth significantly more. This meant he had just
agreed to give me back the book for less money than he had bought it for.

My satisfaction damped itself when it occurred to
me how foolish all of this was. Pennies or talents, I wouldn’t have enough
money to buy the book back in two span. If everything went well I wouldn’t even
be in Tarbean tomorrow.

Despite its uselessness, the receipt helped ease
the sting of parting with the last thing I owned from my childhood. I blew on
the paper, folded it carefully into a pocket, and collected my two silver
talents. I was surprised when the man held out his hand to me.

He smiled in an apologetic way. “Sorry about the
note. But you didn’t look like you’d be coming back.” He gave a little shrug.
“Here.” He pressed a copper jot into my hand.

I decided that he was not an altogether bad fellow.
I smiled back at him and for a second I almost felt guilty about how I’d
written the receipt.

I also felt guilty about the three pens I’d stolen,
but only for a second. And since there was no convenient way to give them back,
I stole a bottle of ink before I left.



CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

A Sea of Stars

I
RETURNED TO DROVER’S Lot with a travelsack swinging by one shoulder. It held a
change of clothes, a loaf of trail bread, some jerked meat, a skin of water,
needle and thread, flint and steel, pens and ink. In short, everything an
intelligent person takes on a trip in the event they might need it.

However, my proudest acquisition was a dark blue
cloak that I had bought off a fripperer’s cart for only three jots. It was
warm, clean, and, unless I missed my guess, only one owner from new.

Now let me say this: when you’re traveling a good
cloak is worth more than all your other possessions put together. If you’ve
nowhere to sleep, it can be your bed and blanket. It will keep the rain off
your back and the sun from your eyes. You can conceal all manner of interesting
weaponry beneath it if you are clever, and a smaller assortment if you are not.

But beyond all that, two facts remain to recommend
a cloak. First, very little is as striking as a well-worn cloak, billowing
lightly about you in the breeze. And second, the best cloaks have innumerable
little pockets that I have an irrational and overpowering attraction toward.

As I have said, this was a good cloak, and it had a
number of such pockets. Squirreled away in them I had string and wax, some
dried apple, a tinderbox, a marble in a small leather sack, a pouch of salt,
hook-needle and gut.

I’d made a point of spending all my carefully
hoarded Commonwealth coin, keeping my hard Cealdish currency for my trip.
Pennies spent well enough here in Tarbean, but Cealdish money was solid no
matter where in the four corners you found yourself.

A final flurry of preparation was being made as I
arrived. Roent paced around the wagons like a restless animal, checking
everything again and again. Reta watched the workers with a stern eye and a
quick word for anything that wasn’t being done to her satisfaction. I was
comfortably ignored until we headed out of the city, toward the University.

 

As the miles rolled away, it was as if a great
weight slowly fell away from me. I reveled in the feel of the ground through my
shoes, the taste of the air, the quiet hush of wind brushing through the spring
wheat in the fields. I found myself grinning for no good reason, save that I
was happy. We Ruh are not meant to stay in one place for so long. I took a deep
breath and nearly laughed out loud.

I kept to myself as we traveled, not being used to
the company of others. Roent and the mercenaries were willing to leave me
alone. Derrik joked with me off and on, but generally found me too reserved for
his tastes.

That left the other passenger, Denna. We didn’t
speak until the first day’s ride was nearly done. I was riding with one of the
mercenaries, absently peeling the bark from a willow switch. While my fingers
worked, I studied the side of her face, admiring the line of her jaw, the curve
of her neck into her shoulder. I wondered why she was traveling alone, and
where she was going. In the middle of my musing she turned to look in my
direction and caught me staring at her.

“Penny for your thought?” she asked, brushing at an
errant strand of hair.

“I was wondering what you’re doing here,” I said
half-honestly.

Smiling, she held my eyes. “Liar.”

I used an old stage trick to keep myself from
blushing, gave my best unconcerned shrug, and looked down at the willow wand I
was peeling. After a few minutes, I heard her return to her conversation with
Reta. I found myself strangely disappointed.

After camp was set and dinner was cooking, I idled
around the wagons, examining the knots Roent used to lash his cargo into place.
I heard a footfall behind me and turned to see Denna approaching. My stomach
rolled over and I took a short breath to compose myself.

She stopped about a dozen feet from me. “Have you
figured it out yet?” she asked.

“Excuse me?”

“Why I’m here.” She smiled gently. “I’ve been
wondering the same thing for most my life, you see. I thought if you had any
ideas….” she gave me awry, hopeful look.

I shook my head, too uncertain of the situation to
find the humor in it. “All I’ve been able to guess is that you’re going
somewhere.”

She nodded seriously. “That’s as much as I’ve
guessed too.” She paused to look at the circle the horizon made around us. The
wind caught her hair and she brushed it back again. “Do you happen to know
where I’m going?”

I felt a smile begin a slow creep onto my face. It
felt odd. I was out of practice smiling. “Don’t you
know?”

“I have suspicions. Right now I’m thinking Anilin.”
She rocked onto the edges of her feet, then back to the flats. “But I’ve been
wrong before.”

A silence settled over our conversation. Denna
looked down at her hands, fidgeting with a ring on her finger, twisting it. I
caught a glimpse of silver and a pale blue stone. Suddenly she dropped her
hands to her sides and looked up at me. “Where are you going?”

“The University.”

She arched an eyebrow, looking ten years older. “So
certain.” She smiled and was suddenly young again. “How does it feel to know
where you are going?”

I couldn’t think of a reply, but was saved from the
need for one by Reta calling us for supper. Denna and I walked toward the
campfire, together.

 

The beginning of the next day was spent in a brief,
awkward courtship. Eager, but not wanting to seem
eager, I made a slow dance around Denna before finally finding some excuse to
spend time with her.

Denna, on the other hand, seemed perfectly at ease.
We spent the rest of the day as if we were old friends. We joked and told
stories. I pointed out the different types of clouds and what they told of the
weather to come. She showed me the shapes they held: a rose, a harp, a
waterfall.

So passed the day. Later, when lots were being
drawn to see who had which turn at watch, Denna and I drew the first two
shifts. Without discussing it, we shared the four hours of watch together.
Talking softly so as to not wake the others, we sat close by the fire and spent
the time watching very little but each other.

The third day was much the same. We passed the time
pleasantly, not in long conversation, but more often watching the scenery,
saying whatever happened to come to our minds. That night we stopped at a
wayside inn where Reta bought fodder for the horses and a few other supplies.

Reta retired early with her husband, telling each
of us that she’d arranged for our dinners and beds with the innkeeper. The
former was quite good, bacon and potato soup with fresh bread and butter. The
latter was in the stables, but it was still a long sight better than what I was
used to in Tarbean.

The common room smelled of smoke and sweat and
spilled beer. I was glad when Denna asked if I wanted to take a walk. Outside
was the warm quiet of a windless spring night. We talked as we wended our slow
way through the wild bit of forest behind the inn. After a while we came to a
wide clearing circling a pond.

On the edge of the water were a pair of waystones,
their surfaces silver against the black of the sky, the black of the water. One
stood upright, a finger pointing to the sky. The other lay flat, extending into
the water like a short stone pier.

No breath of wind disturbed the surface of the
water. So as we climbed out onto the fallen stone the stars reflected
themselves in double fashion; as above, so below. It was as if we were sitting
amid a sea of stars.

We spoke for hours, late into the night. Neither of
us mentioned our pasts. I sensed that there were things she would rather not
talk about, and by the way she avoided questioning me, I think she guessed the
same. We spoke of ourselves instead, of fond imaginings and impossible things.
I pointed to the skies and told her the names of stars and constellations. She
told me stories about them I had never heard before.

My eyes were always returning to Denna. She sat
beside me, arms hugging her knees. Her skin was more luminous than the moon,
her eyes wider than the sky, deeper than the water, darker than the night.

It slowly began to dawn on me that I had been
staring at her wordlessly for an impossible amount of time. Lost in my
thoughts, lost in the sight of her. But her face didn’t look offended or
amused. It almost looked as if she were studying the lines of my face, almost
as if she were waiting.

I wanted to take her hand. I wanted to brush her
cheek with my fingertips. I wanted to tell her that she was the first beautiful
thing I had seen in three years. That the sight of her yawning to the back of
her hand was enough to drive the breath from me. How I sometimes lost the sense
of her words in the sweet fluting of her voice. I wanted to say that if she
were with me then somehow nothing could ever be wrong for me again.

In that breathless second I almost asked her. I
felt the question boiling up from my chest. I remember drawing a breath then
hesitating—what could I say? Come away with me? Stay with me? Come to the
University? No. Sudden certainty tightened in my chest like a cold fist. What
could I ask her? What could I offer? Nothing. Anything I said would sound
foolish, a child’s fantasy.

I closed my mouth and looked across the water.
Inches away, Denna did the same. I could feel the heat of her. She smelled like
road dust, and honey, and the smell the air holds seconds before a heavy summer
rain.

Neither of us spoke. I closed my eyes. The
closeness of her was the sweetest, sharpest thing my life had ever known.



CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR

Yetto Learn

THE
NEXT MORNING I blearily awoke after two hours of sleep, bundled myself onto one
of the wagons and proceeded to drowse away the morning. It was nearly noon
before I realized that we had taken on another passenger at the inn last night.

His name was Josn, and he had paid Roent for
passage to Anilin. He had an easy manner and an honest smile. He seemed an
earnest man. I did not like him.

My reason was simple. He spent the entire day
riding next to Denna. He flattered her outrageously and joked with her about
becoming one of his wives. She seemed unaffected by the late hours we had kept
the night before, looking as bright and fresh as ever.

The result was that I spent the day being irritated
and jealous while acting unconcerned. Since I was too proud to join their
conversation, I was left to myself. I spent the day thinking sullen thoughts,
trying to ignore the sound of his voice and occasionally remembering the way
Denna had looked last night with the moon reflecting off the water behind her.

 

That night I was planning to ask Denna to go for a
walk after everyone turned in for the night. But before I could approach her,
Josn went to one of the wagons and brought back a large black case with brass
buckles along the side. The sight of it made my heart turn sideways in my
chest.

Sensing the group’s anticipation, though not mine
in particular, Josn slowly undid the brass clasps and drew out his lute with an
air of studied nonchalance. It was a trouper’s lute, its long, graceful neck
and round bowl were painfully familiar. Sure of everyone’s attention, he cocked
his head and strummed, pausing to listen to the sound. Then, nodding to
himself, he started to play.

He had a fair tenor and reasonably clever fingers.
He played a ballad, then a light, quick drinking song, then a slow, sad melody
in a language that I didn’t recognize but suspected might be Yllish. Lastly he
played “Tinker Tanner,” and everyone came in on the chorus. Everyone but me.

I sat still as stone with my fingers aching. I
wanted to play, not listen. Want isn’t strong enough
a word. I was hungry for it, starved. I’m not proud of the fact that I thought
about stealing his lute and leaving in the dark of the night.

He finished the song with a flourish, and Roent
clapped his hands a couple of times to get everyone’s attention. “Time for
sleep. You sleep too late—”

Derrik broke in, gently teasing. “…we get left behind. We know, Master Roent. We’ll be ready
to roll with the light.”

Josn laughed and flipped open his lute case with
his foot. But before he could put it away I called over to him. “Could I see
that for a second?” I tried to keep the desperation out of my voice, tried to
make it sound like idle curiosity.

I hated myself for the question. Asking to hold a
musician’s instrument is roughly similar to asking to kiss a man’s wife.
Nonmusicians don’t understand. An instrument is like a companion and a lover.
Strangers ask to touch and hold with annoying regularity. I knew better, but I
couldn’t help myself. “Just for a second?”

I saw him stiffen slightly, reluctant. But keeping
friendly appearances is a minstrel’s business just as much as music.
“Certainly,” he said with a jocularity that I saw as false but was probably
convincing for the others. He strode over to me and held it out. “Be careful…”

Josn took a couple of steps back and gave a very
good appearance of being at ease. But I saw how he stood with his arms slightly
bent, ready to rush forward and whisk the lute away from me if the need arose.

I turned it over in my hands. Objectively, it was
nothing special. My father would have rated it as one short step above
firewood. I touched the wood. I cradled it against my chest.

I spoke without looking up. “It’s beautiful,” I
said softly, my voice rough with emotion.

It was beautiful. It was the most beautiful thing I
had seen in three years. More beautiful than the sight of a spring field after
three years of living in that pestilent cesspit of a city. More beautiful than
Denna. Almost.

I can honestly say that I was still not really
myself. I was only four days away from living on the streets. I was not the
same person I had been back in the days of the troupe, but neither was I yet
the person you hear about in stories. I had changed because of Tarbean. I had
learned many things it would have been easier to live without.

But sitting beside the fire, bending over the lute,
I felt the hard, unpleasant parts of myself that I had gained in Tarbean crack.
Like a clay mold around a now-cool piece of iron they fell away, leaving
something clean and hard behind.

I sounded the strings, one at a time. When I hit
the third it was ever so slightly off and I gave one of the tuning pegs a
minute adjustment without thinking.

“Here now, don’t go touching those,” Josn tried to
sound casual, “you’ll turn it from true.” But I didn’t really hear him. The
singer and all the rest couldn’t have been farther away from me if they’d been
at the bottom of the Centhe Sea.

I touched the last string and tuned it too, ever so
slightly. I made a simple chord and strummed it. It rang soft and true. I moved
a finger and the chord went minor in a way that always sounded to me as if the
lute were saying sad. I moved my hands again and the
lute made two chords whispering against each other. Then, without realizing
what I was doing, I began to play.

The strings felt strange against my fingers, like
reunited friends who have forgotten what they have in common. I played soft and
slow, sending notes no farther than the circle of our firelight. Fingers and
strings made a careful conversation, as if their dance described the lines of
an infatuation.

Then I felt something inside me break and music
began to pour out into the quiet. My fingers danced; intricate and quick they
spun something gossamer and tremulous into the circle of light our fire had
made. The music moved like a spiderweb stirred by a gentle breath, it changed
like a leaf twisting as it falls to the ground, and it felt like three years
Waterside in Tarbean, with a hollowness inside you and hands that ached from
the bitter cold.

I don’t know how long I played. It could have been
ten minutes or an hour. But my hands weren’t used to the strain. They slipped
and the music fell to pieces like a dream on waking.

I looked up to see everyone perfectly motionless,
their faces ranging from shock to amazement. Then, as if my gaze had broken
some spell, everyone stirred. Roent shifted in his seat. The two mercenaries
turned and raised eyebrows at each other. Derrik looked at me as if he had
never seen me before.

Reta remained frozen, her hand held in front of her
mouth. Denna lowered her face into her hands and began to cry in quiet,
hopeless sobs.

Josn simply stood. His face was stricken and
bloodless as if he had been stabbed.

I held out the lute, not knowing whether to thank
him or apologize. He took it numbly. After a moment, unable to think of
anything to say, I left them sitting by the fire and walked toward the wagons.

And that is how Kvothe spent his last night before
he came to the University, with his cloak as both his blanket and his bed. As
he lay down, behind him was a circle of fire, and before him lay shadow like a
mantle, gathered. His eyes were open, that much is certain, but who among us
can say they know what he was seeing?

Look behind him instead, to the circle of light
that the fire has made, and leave Kvothe to himself for now. Everyone deserves
a moment or two alone when they desire it. And if by chance there were tears,
let us forgive him. He was just a child, after all, and had yet to learn what
sorrow really was.



CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

A Parting of Ways

THE
WEATHER HELD FAIR, which meant that the wagons rolled into Imre just as the sun
was setting. My mood was sullen and hurt. Denna had shared a wagon with Josn
the whole of the day, and I, being foolish and proud, had kept my distance.

A whirl of activity sprang up as soon as the wagons
rolled to a stop. Roent began to argue with a clean-shaven man in a velvet hat
before he had brought his wagon to a full stop. After the initial bout of
bargaining, a dozen men began unloading bolts of cloth, barrels of molasses,
and burlap sacks of coffee. Reta cast a stern eye over the lot of them. Josn
scuttled around, trying to keep his luggage from being damaged or stolen.

My own luggage was easier to manage, as I only had
my travelsack. I retrieved it from between some bolts of cloth and moved away
from the wagons. I slung it over one shoulder and looked around for Denna.

I found Reta instead. “You were a great help on the
road,” she said clearly. Her Aturan was much better than Roent’s, with hardly any
trace of a Siaru accent at all. “It is nice to have someone along who can
unhitch a horse without being led by the hand.” She held out a coin to me.

I took it without thinking. It was a reflex action
from my years as a beggar. Like the reverse of jerking your hand back from a
fire. Only after the coin was in my hand did I take a closer look at it. It was
a whole copper jot, fully half of what I had paid to travel with them to Imre.
When I looked back up, Reta was heading back toward the wagons.

Not sure what to think, I wandered over to where
Derrick sat on the edge of a horse trough. He shaded his eyes against the
evening sun with one hand as he looked up at me. “On your way then? I almost
thought you might stick with us for a while.”

I shook my head. “Reta just gave me a jot.”

He nodded. “I’m not terribly surprised. Most folks
are nothing but dead weight.” He shrugged. “And she appreciated your playing.
Have you ever thought of trying out as a minstrel? They say Imre’s a good place
for it.”

I steered the conversation back to Reta. “I don’t
want Roent to be angry with her. He seems to take his money pretty seriously.”

Derrick laughed. “And she doesn’t?”

“I gave my money to Roent,” I clarified. “If he’d
wanted to give some of it back, I think he’d do it himself.”

Derrick nodded. “It’s not their way. A man doesn’t
give money away.”

“That’s my point,” I said. “I don’t want her to get
in trouble.”

Derrick waved his hands back and forth, cutting me
off. “I’m not doing a good job explaining myself,” he said. “Roent knows. He
might have even sent her over to do it. But grown Cealdish men don’t give away
money. It’s seen as womanish behavior. They don’t even buy things if they can
help it. Didn’t you notice that Reta was the one who bargained for our rooms
and food at the inn a few nights ago?”

I did remember, now that he mentioned it. “But
why?” I asked.

Derrick shrugged. “There isn’t any why. It’s just
the way they do things. That’s why so many Cealdish caravans are husband-wife
teams.”

“Derrick!” Roent’s voice came from behind the
wagons.

He sighed as he stood up. “Duty calls,” he said.
“See you around.”

I tucked the jot into my pocket and thought about
what Derrick had said. The truth was, my troupe had never gone so far north as
to make it into the Shald. It was unnerving to think I wasn’t as world-wise as
I’d thought.

I slung my travelsack over my shoulder and looked
around one last time, thinking that perhaps it would be best if I left without
any troublesome good-byes. Denna was nowhere to be seen. That settled it then.
I turned to leave…

…and found her standing behind me. She smiled a
little awkwardly with her hands clasped behind her back. She was lovely as a
flower, and totally unconscious of it. I was suddenly short of breath, and I
forgot myself, my irritation, my hurt.

“You’re still going?” She asked.

I nodded.

“You could come to Anilin with us,” she suggested.
“They say the streets are paved with gold there. You could teach Josn to play
that lute he carries around.” She smiled. “I’ve asked him, and he’s said he
wouldn’t mind.”

I considered it. For half a heartbeat I almost
threw my whole plan aside just to stay with her a little longer. But the moment
passed and I shook my head.

“Don’t look like that,” she chided me with a smile.
“I’ll be there for a while, if things don’t work out for you here.” She trailed
off hopefully.

I didn’t know what I could
do if things didn’t work out for me here. I was hanging all my hopes on the
University. Besides, Anilin was hundreds of miles away. I barely owned the
clothes on my back. How would I find her?

Denna must have seen my thoughts reflected on my
face. She smiled playfully. “I guess I’ll just have to come looking for you,
then.”

We Ruh are travelers. Our lives are composed of
meetings and partings, with brief, bright acquaintances in-between. Because of
this I knew the truth. I felt it, heavy and certain in the pit of my stomach: I
would never see her again.

Before I could say anything she looked nervously
behind her. “I had better go. Watch for me.” She flashed her impish smile again
before turning to walk away.

“I will,” I called after her. “I’ll see you where
the roads meet.”

She glanced back and hesitated for a moment, then
waved and ran off into the early evening twilight.



CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE

Enough Rope

THE
NEXT DAY I was ten minutes early to Hemme’s class, sitting in the front row. I
hoped to catch Hemme before the class started, thereby saving myself from
having to sit through another one of his lectures.

Unfortunately, he did not appear early. The lecture
hall was full when he entered by the hall’s lower door and climbed the three
steps onto the raised wooden stage. He looked around the hall, eyes searching
me out. “Ah yes, our young prodigy. Stand up, would you?”

Uncertain as to what was going on, I stood.

“I have pleasant news for everyone,” he said. “Mr.
Kvothe here has assured me as to his complete grasp of the principles of
sympathy. In doing so, he has offered to give today’s lecture.” He made an
expansive gesture for me to join him on the stage. He smiled at me with hard
eyes. “Mr. Kvothe?”

He was mocking me, of course, expecting me to slink
down into my seat, cowed and ashamed.

But I had had enough of bullies in my life. So I
climbed onto the stage and shook his hand. Using a good stage voice I spoke to
the students, “I thank Master Hemme for this opportunity. I only hope that I
can help him shed some light on this most important subject.”

Having started this little game, Hemme was unable
to stop it without looking foolish. As he shook my hand he gave me the look a
wolf gives a treed cat. Smiling to himself, he left the stage to assume my
recently vacated seat in the front row. Confident of my ignorance, he was
willing to let the charade continue.

I would never have gotten away with it if not for
two of Hemme’s numerous flaws. First, his general stupidity in not believing
what I had told him the day before. Second, his desire to see me embarrassed as
thoroughly as possible.

Plainly said, he was giving me enough rope to hang
myself with. Apparently he didn’t realize that once a noose is tied, it will
fit one neck as easily as another.

I faced the class. “Today I will be presenting an
example of the laws of sympathy. However, as time is limited I will need help
with the preparations.” I pointed to a student at random. “Would you be so good
as to bring me one of Master Hemme’s hairs, please?”

Hemme offered one up with an exaggerated
graciousness. As the student brought it up to me, Hemme smiled in genuine
amusement, certain that the more grandiose my preparations were, the greater my
embarrassment would be in the end.

I took advantage of this slight delay to look over
what equipment I had to work with. A brazier sat off to one side of the stage,
and a quick rifling of the drawers in the worktable revealed chalk, a prism,
sulfur matches, an enlarging glass, some candles, and a few oddly-shaped blocks
of metal. I took three of the candles and left the rest.

I took Master Hemme’s hair from the student and
recognized him as Basil, the boy Hemme had browbeat yesterday. “Thank you,
Basil. Would you bring that brazier over here and get it burning as quickly as
you can?” As he brought it closer I was delighted to see that it was equipped
with a small bellows. While he poured alcohol onto the coal and struck a spark
to it, I addressed the class.

“The concepts of sympathy are not entirely easy to
grasp. But underneath everything there remain three simple laws.”

“First is the Doctrine of Correspondence which
says, ‘similarity enhances sympathy.’ Second is the Principle of Consanguinity,
which says, ‘a piece of a thing can represent the whole of a thing.’ Third is
the Law of Conservation, which says ‘energy cannot be destroyed nor created.’
Correspondence, Consanguinity, and Conservation. The three C’s.”

I paused and listened to the sound of a half
hundred pens scratching down my words. Beside me, Basil pumped industriously at
the bellows. I realized I could grow to enjoy this.

“Don’t worry if it doesn’t make sense yet. The
demonstration should make everything abundantly clear.” Looking down, I saw the
brazier was warming nicely. I thanked Basil and hung a shallow metal pan above
the coals and dropped two of the candles in to melt.

I set a third candle in a holder on the table and
used one of the sulfur matches in the drawer to set it alight. Next, I moved
the pan off the heat and poured its now-melted contents carefully onto the
table, forming a fist-sized blob of soft wax. I looked back up at the students.

“In sympathy, most of what you are doing is
redirecting energy. Sympathetic links are how the energy travels.” I pulled out
the wicking and began kneading the wax into a roughly human-shaped doll. “The
first law I mentioned, ‘Similarity enhances sympathy,’ simply means that the
more things resemble each other, the stronger the sympathetic link between them
will be.”

I held the crude doll up for the class to inspect.
“This,” I said, “is Master Hemme.” Laughter muttered back and forth across the
hall. “Actually, this is my sympathetic representation of Master Hemme. Would anyone
like to take a guess as to why it is not a very good one?”

There was a moment of silence. I let it stretch out
for a while, a cold audience. Hemme had traumatized them yesterday and they
were slow in responding. Finally, from the back of the room, a student said,
“It’s the wrong size?”

I nodded and continued to look around the room.

“He isn’t made of wax either.”

I nodded. “It does bear some small resemblance to
him, in general shape and proportion. Nevertheless, it is a very poor
sympathetic representation. Because of that, any sympathetic link based off it
would be rather weak. Perhaps two percent efficiency. How could we improve it?”

There was another silence, shorter than the first.
“You could make it bigger,” someone suggested. I nodded and waited. Other
voices called out, “You could carve Master Hemme’s face on it.” “Paint it.”
“Give it a little robe.” Everyone laughed.

I held up my hand for quiet and was surprised by
how quickly it fell. “Practicality aside, assume you did all these things. A six-foot,
fully-clothed, masterfully carved Master Hemme stands beside me.” I gestured.
“Even with all that effort the best you might hope for is ten or fifteen
percent sympathetic link. Not very good, not very good at all.

“This brings me to the second law, Consanguinity.
An easy way of thinking of it is, ‘once together, always together.’ Due to
Master Hemme’s generosity I have one of his hairs.” I held it up, and
ceremoniously stuck it to the head of the doll. “And as easy as this, we have a
sympathetic link that will work at thirty to thirty-five percent.”

I had been watching Hemme. While at first he had
seemed a little wary, he had lapsed back into a self-satisfied smirk. He knew
that without the appropriate binding and properly focused Alar, all the wax and
hair in the world wouldn’t do one whit of good.

Sure that he had taken me for a fool, I gestured to
the candle and asked him, “With your permission, Master?” He made a magnanimous
wave of compliance and settled back into his chair, folding his arms in front
of him, confident in his safety.

Of course I did know the binding. I’d told him so.
And Ben had taught me about the Alar, the riding-crop belief, back when I was
twelve.

But I didn’t bother with either. I put the doll’s
foot into the candle flame, which guttered and smoked.

There was a tense, held-breath quiet as everyone
stretched in their seats to get a look at Master Hemme.

Hemme shrugged, feigning astonishment. But his eyes
had the look of a jaw trap about to close. A smirk tugged at one corner of his
mouth, and he began to rise from his seat. “I feel nothing. Wh—”

“Exactly.” I said, cracking my voice like a whip,
startling the students’ attentions back to me. “And why is that?” I looked
expectantly at the lecture hall.

“Because of the third law that I had mentioned,
Conservation. ‘Energy cannot be destroyed or created, merely lost or found.’ If
I were to hold a candle underneath our esteemed teacher’s foot, very little
would occur. And since only about thirty percent of the heat is getting through,
we do not even get that small result.”

I paused to let them think for a moment. “This is
the prime problem in sympathy. Where do we get the energy? Here, however, the
answer is simple.”

I blew out the candle and relit it from the
brazier. Muttering the few necessary words underneath my breath. “By adding a
second sympathetic link between the candle and a more substantial fire….” I
broke my mind into two pieces, one binding Hemme and the doll together, the
other connecting the candle and the brazier. “We get the desired effect.”

I casually moved the foot of the wax doll into the
space about an inch above the candle’s wick, which is actually the hottest part
of the flame.

There was a startled exclamation from where Hemme
was sitting.

Without looking in his direction I continued
speaking to the class in the driest of tones. “And it appears that this time we
are successful.” The class laughed.

I blew out the candle. “This is also a good example
of the power that a clever sympathist commands. Imagine what would happen if I
were to throw this doll into the fire itself?” I held it over the brazier.

As if on cue, Hemme stormed onto the stage. It may
have been my imagination, but it seemed to me that he was favoring his left leg
slightly.

“It appears that Master Hemme wishes to resume your
instruction at this point.” Laughter rippled through the room, louder this
time. “I thank you all: students and friends. And thus my humble lecture ends.”

At this point I used one of the tricks of the
stage. There is a certain inflection of voice and body language that signals a
crowd to applaud. I cannot explain how exactly it is done, but it had its
intended effect. I nodded my head to them and turned to face Hemme amidst
applause which, though far from deafening, was probably more than any he had
ever received.

As he took the last few steps toward me I almost
backed away. His face was a fearsome red and a vein pulsed at his temple as if
it were about to explode.

For my own part, my stage training helped me
maintain my composure, I returned his gaze levelly and held out my hand for him
to shake. It was with no small amount of satisfaction that I watched him give a
quick glance to the still applauding class, swallow, and shake my hand.

His handshake was painfully tight. It might have gotten
worse if I hadn’t made a slight gesture over the brazier with the wax doll. His
face went from its livid red to an ashen white more quickly than I would have
believed possible. His grip underwent a similar transformation and I regained
my hand.

With another nod toward the seated students, I left
the lecture hall without a backward glance.



CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE

Interlude—Some
Tavern Tale

AT
A GESTURE FROM Kvothe, Chronicler wiped off the nib of his pen and shook out
his hand. Bast gave a great, seated stretch, his arms arching over the back of
the chair.

“I’d almost forgotten how quickly it all happened,”
Kvothe mused. “Those were probably the first stories anyone ever told about
me.”

“They’re still telling them at the University,”
Chronicler said. “I’ve heard three different versions of the class you taught.
Your whipping, too. Is that when they started calling you Kvothe the
Bloodless?”

Kvothe nodded. “Possibly.”

“If we’re asking questions, Reshi,” Bast said
sheepishly, “I was wondering why you didn’t go looking for Skarpi?”

“What could I have done, Bast? Smeared my face with
lampblack and staged a daring midnight rescue?” Kvothe gave a brief humorless
laugh. “They’d taken him in on heresy. All I could
do was hope he truly had friends in the church.”

Kvothe drew a deep breath and sighed. “But the
simplest reason is the least satisfying one, I suppose. The truth is this: I
wasn’t living in a story.”

“I don’t think I’m understanding you, Reshi,” Bast
said, puzzled.

“Think of all the stories you’ve heard, Bast. You
have a young boy, the hero. His parents are killed. He sets out for vengeance.
What happens next?”

Bast hesitated, his expression puzzled. Chronicler
answered the question instead. “He finds help. A clever talking squirrel. An
old drunken swordsman. A mad hermit in the woods. That sort of thing.”

Kvothe nodded. “Exactly! He finds the mad hermit in
the woods, proves himself worthy, and learns the names of all things, just like
Taborlin the Great. Then with these powerful magics at his beck and call, what
does he do?”

Chronicler shrugged. “He finds the villains and
kills them.”

“Of course,” Kvothe said grandly. “Clean, quick,
and easy as lying. We know how it ends practically before it starts. That’s why
stories appeal to us. They give us the clarity and simplicity our real lives
lack.”

Kvothe leaned forward. “If this were some tavern
tale, all half-truth and senseless adventure, I would tell you how my time at
the University was spent with a purity of dedication. I would learn the
ever-changing name of the wind, ride out, and gain my revenge against the
Chandrian.” Kvothe snapped his fingers sharply. “Simple as that.

“But while that might make for an entertaining
story, it would not be the truth. The truth is this. I had mourned my parent’s
death for three years, and the pain of it had faded to a dull ache.”

Kvothe made a conciliatory gesture with one hand,
and smiled a tight smile. “I won’t lie to you. There were times late at night
when I lay sleepless and desperately alone in my narrow bunk in the Mews, times
when I was choked with a sorrow so endless and empty that I thought it would
smother me.

“There were times when I would see a mother holding
her child, or a father laughing with his son, and anger would flare up in me,
hot and furious with the memory of blood and the smell of burning hair.”

Kvothe shrugged. “But there was more to my life
than revenge. I had very real obstacles to overcome close at hand. My poverty.
My low birth. The enemies I made at the University were more dangerous to me than
any of the Chandrian.”

He gestured for Chronicler to pick up his pen. “But
for all that, we still see that even the most fanciful of stories hold a shred
of truth, because I did find something very near to the mad hermit in the
woods.” Kvothe smiled. “And I was determined to
learn the name of the wind.”



CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN

Barbs

ASIDE
FROM ITS ROCKY start, my first term went fairly smoothly.

I studied in the Medica, learning more about the
body and how to heal it. I practiced my Siaru with Wilem and helped him with
his Aturan in exchange.

I joined the ranks of the Artificery, studying how
to blow glass, mix alloys, draw wire, inscribe metal, and sculpt stone.

Most evenings I came back to Kilvin’s workshop to
work. I chipped casings off bronze castings, washed glassware, and ground ore
for alloys. It was not demanding work, but every span Kilvin gave me a copper
jot, sometimes two. I suspected there was a great tally board in that
methodical mind of his, carefully marking down the hours each person worked.

I learned things of a less academic nature as well.
Some of my Arcanum bunkmates taught me a card game called dogsbreath. I
returned the favor by giving an impromptu lesson in psychology, probability,
and manual dexterity. I won almost two whole talents before they stopped
inviting me back to their games.

I became tight friends with Wilem and Simmon. I had
some few others, but not many, and none so close as Wil and Sim. My swift rise
to E’lir alienated me from most of the other students. Whether they resented or
admired me, most students held themselves apart.

And there was Ambrose. To deem us simply enemies is
to lose the true flavor of our relationship. It was more like the two of us
entered into a business partnership in order to more efficiently pursue our
mutual interest of hating each other.

However, even with my vendetta against Ambrose, I
still had a great deal of time on my hands. Since I wasn’t able to spend it in
the Archives, I spent some time nurturing my budding reputation.

You see, my dramatic entrance to the University had
made quite a stir. I’d made my way into the Arcanum in three days instead of
the usual three terms. I was the youngest member by almost two years. I had
openly defied one of the masters in front of his own class and avoided
expulsion. When whipped, I hadn’t cried out or bled.

On top of everything else, I had apparently managed
to infuriate Master Elodin to such an extent that he had thrown me off the roof
of the Crockery. I let that story circulate uncorrected, as it was preferable
to the embarrassing truth.

All together, it was enough to start a steady
stream of rumor around me, and I decided to take advantage of it. Reputation is
like a sort of armor, or a weapon you can brandish if need be. I decided that
if I was going to be an arcanist, I might as well be a well-known arcanist.

So I let slip a few pieces of information: I had
been admitted without a letter of recommendation. The masters had given me
three talents to attend, rather than make me pay a tuition. I had survived for
years on the streets of Tarbean, living off my wits.

I even started a few rumors that were pure
nonsense, lies so outrageous that people would repeat them despite the fact
that they were obviously untrue. I had demon blood in me. I could see in the
dark. I only slept an hour each night. When the moon was full I would talk in
my sleep, speaking a strange language no one could understand.

Basil, my former bunkmate from Mews, helped me
start these rumors. I would make up the stories, he would tell a few people,
then together we would watch them spread like a fire in a field. It was an
amusing hobby.

But my ongoing feud with Ambrose added to my
reputation more than anything else. Everyone was stunned that I dared openly
defy a powerful noble’s firstborn son.

We had several dramatic encounters that first term.
I won’t bore you with the details. We’d cross paths and he would make some
offhand comment loud enough for everyone in the room to hear. Or he would sneer
at me under the guise of a compliment. “You must
tell me who cuts your hair…”

Anyone with a lick of common sense knew how to deal
with arrogant nobility. The tailor I had terrorized back in Tarbean knew what
to do. You take your lumps, duck your head, and get the whole thing over as
quickly as possible.

But I always fought
back, and while Ambrose was intelligent and reasonably well-spoken, he was no
match for my trouper’s tongue. I had been raised on the stage, and my sharp Ruh
wits ensured that I got the better of our exchanges.

Still Ambrose continued to seek me out, like a dog
too stupid to avoid a porcupine. He would snap at me and leave with a face full
of barbs. And each time we parted ways we hated each other just a little more.

People noticed, and by the end of the term I had a
reputation for reckless bravery. But the truth is, I was merely fearless.

There’s a difference, you see. In Tarbean I’d
learned real fear. I feared hunger, pneumonia, guards with hobnail boots, older
boys with bottleglass knives. Confronting Ambrose required no real bravery on
my part. I simply couldn’t muster any fear of him. I saw him as a puffed-up
clown. I thought he was harmless.

I was a fool.



CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT

Interlude—A
Silence of a Different Kind

BAST
SAT IN THE Waystone Inn and tried to keep his hands motionless in his lap. He
had counted fifteen breaths since Kvothe had spoken last, and the innocent
silence that had gathered like a clear pool around the three men was beginning
to darken into a silence of a different kind. Bast took another
breath—sixteen—and braced himself against the moment he feared would come.

It would not be to Bast’s credit to say that he was
afraid of nothing, as only fools and priests are never afraid. But it is true
that very few things unnerved him. Heights, for instance, he didn’t care for
very much. And the great summer storms that came through these parts that
blackened the sky and tore up deep-rooted oaks made him feel uncomfortably
small and helpless.

But when you came down to it, nothing really
frightened him, not storms, not tall ladders, not even the scrael. Bast was
brave by being largely fearless. Nothing would turn him pale, or if it did, he
didn’t stay pale for very long.

Oh, certainly he didn’t relish the thought of
someone hurting him. Stabbing him with bitter iron, searing him with hot coals,
that sort of thing. But just because he didn’t like the thought of his blood on
the outside didn’t mean he was really afraid of those things. He just didn’t
want them to happen. To really fear something you have to dwell on it. And
since there was nothing that preyed on Bast’s waking mind in this fashion,
there was nothing his heart truly feared.

But hearts can change. Ten years ago he had lost
his grip climbing a tall rennel tree to pick fruit for a girl he fancied. After
he slipped, he had hung for a long minute, head down, before falling. In that
long minute, a small fear rooted inside him, and had stayed with him ever
since.

In the same way, Bast had learned a new fear of
late. A year ago he had been fearless as any sane man can hope to be, but now
Bast feared silence. Not the ordinary silence that came from a simple absence
of things moving about and making noise. Bast feared the deep, weary silence
that gathered around his master at times, like an invisible shroud.

Bast breathed in again—seventeen. He fought not to
wring his hands as he waited for the deep silence to invade the room. He waited
for it to crystallize and show its teeth on the edges of the cool quiet that
had pooled in the Waystone. He knew how it came, like the frost that bleeds out
of the winter ground, hardening the clear water that an early thaw leaves in
wagon ruts.

But before Bast could draw another breath, Kvothe
straightened in his chair and made a motion for Chronicler to lay down his pen.
Bast nearly wept as he sensed the silence scatter like a dark bird startled
into flight.

Kvothe gave a sigh that hovered between annoyance
and resignation. “I will admit,” he said. “That I am not sure how to approach
the next part of the story.”

Afraid to let the silence stretch for too long,
Bast chirruped, “Why don’t you simply talk about what is most important first?
Then you can go back and touch on other things, if you need to.”

“As if it were as simple as that,” Kvothe said
sharply. “What is most important? My magic or my music? My triumphs or my
follies?”

Bast flushed a deep crimson and bit his lips.

Kvothe let out his breath in a sudden rush. “I’m
sorry, Bast. It’s good advice, as all of your seemingly inane advice turns out
to be.” He pushed his chair back from the table. “But before we continue, the
real world has certain calls on me that I can no longer ignore. If you will
please excuse me for a moment?”

Chronicler and Bast stood as well, stretching their
legs and attending to calls of their own. Bast lit the lamps. Kvothe produced
more cheese and bread and hard spiced sausage. They ate, and some small effort
was made at polite conversation, but their minds were elsewhere, dwelling on
the story.

Bast ate half of everything. Chronicler accounted
for a sizable, though more modest amount. Kvothe had a bite or two before he
spoke. “Onward then. Music and magic. Triumph and folly. Think now. What does
our story need? What vital element is it lacking?”

“Women, Reshi,” Bast said immediately. “There’s a
real paucity of women.”

Kvothe smiled. “Not women,
Bast. A woman. The woman.” Kvothe looked at
Chronicler. “You have heard bits and pieces, I don’t doubt. I will tell you the
truth of her. Though I fear I may not be equal to the challenge.”

Chronicler picked up his pen, but before he could
dip it, Kvothe held up a hand. “Let me say one thing before I start. I’ve told
stories in the past, painted pictures with words, told hard lies and harder
truths. Once, I sang colors to a blind man. Seven hours I played, but at the
end he said he saw them, green and red and gold. That, I think, was easier than
this. Trying to make you understand her with nothing more than words. You have
never seen her, never heard her voice. You cannot know.”

Kvothe motioned for Chronicler to pick up his pen.
“But still, I will try. She is in the wings now, waiting for her cue. Let us
set the stage for her arrival….”



CHAPTER FORTY-NINE

The Nature of
Wild Things

AS
WITH ALL TRULY wild things, care is necessary in approaching them. Stealth is
useless. Wild things recognize stealth for what it is, a lie and a trap. While
wild things might play games of stealth, and in doing so may even occasionally
fall prey to stealth, they are never truly caught by it.

So. With slow care rather than stealth we must
approach the subject of a certain woman. Her wildness is of such degree, I fear
approaching her too quickly even in a story. Should I move recklessly, I might
startle even the idea of her into sudden flight.

So in the name of slow care, I will speak of how I
met her. And to do that, I must speak of the events that brought me, quite
unwillingly, across the river and into Imre.

 

I finished my first term with three silver talents
and a single jot. Not long ago, it would have seemed like all the money in the
world to me. Now I simply hoped it would be enough for one more term’s tuition
and a bunk in the Mews.

The last span of every term at the University was
reserved for admissions exams. Classes were canceled and the masters spent
several hours of each day conducting examinations. Your next term’s tuition was
based on your performance. A lottery determined what day and hour you would go
through admissions.

A great deal hung on the brief interview. Missing a
few questions could easily double your tuition. Because of this, slots later in
the span were highly prized, as they gave students more time to study and
prepare. There was a vigorous trade in appointment times after the lottery was
held. Money and favors were bartered as everyone vied for a time that suited
them.

I was lucky enough to draw a midmorning hour on
Cendling, the last day of admissions. If I’d wanted to, I could have sold my
slot, but I preferred to take the extra time to study. I knew my performance
would have to be brilliant, as several of the masters were now less than
impressed by me. My previous trick of spying was out of the question. I now
knew it was grounds for expulsion, and I couldn’t risk that.

Despite the long days I spent studying with Wil and
Sim, admissions were difficult. I breezed through many of the questions, but
Hemme was openly hostile, asking questions with more than one answer so that
nothing I said could be correct. Brandeur was difficult as well, clearly
helping Hemme carry his grudge. Lorren was unreadable, but I sensed his
disapproval rather than seeing it on his face.

Afterward, I fidgeted while the masters discussed
my tuition. Voices were calm and muted at first, then became somewhat louder. Eventually,
Kilvin stood and shook a finger at Hemme while shouting and pounding the table
with his other hand. Hemme maintained more composure than I would have if I had
been faced with twenty stone of furious, bellowing artificer.

After the Chancellor managed to regain control of
things, I was called forward and given my receipt. “E’lir Kvothe. Fall term.
Tuition: 3 Tln. 9 Jt. 7 Fe.”

Eight jots more than I had. As I walked out of the
Masters’ Hall, I ignored the sinking feeling in my gut and tried to think of a
way I could lay hands on more money by tomorrow noon.

I made a brief stop at the two Cealdish
moneychangers on this side of the river. As I suspected, they wouldn’t lend me
a thin shim. While I wasn’t surprised, the experience was sobering, reminding
me again of how different I was from the other students. They had families
paying their tuition, granting them allowances to cover their living expenses.
They had reputable names they could borrow against in a pinch. They had
possessions they could pawn or sell. If worse came to worst, they had homes to
return to.

I had none of these things. If I couldn’t come up
with eight more jots for tuition, I had nowhere in the world I could go.

Borrowing from a friend seemed like the simplest
option, but I valued my handful of friends too much to risk losing them over
money. As my father used to say: “There are two sure ways to lose a friend, one
is to borrow, the other to lend.”

Besides, I did my best to keep my desperate poverty
to myself. Pride is a foolish thing, but it is a powerful force. I wouldn’t ask
them for money except as my very last resort.

I briefly considered trying to cutpurse the money,
but I knew it was a bad idea. If I were caught with my hand in someone’s
pocket, I would get more than a cuff round the head. At best I’d be jailed and
forced to stand against the iron law. At worst, I’d end up on the horns and
expelled for Conduct Unbecoming a Member of the Arcanum. I couldn’t risk it.

I needed a gaelet, one of the dangerous men who
lend money to desperate people. You might have heard them referred to
romantically as copper hawks, but more often they’re referred to as shim-galls,
or lets. Regardless of the name, they exist everywhere. The hard part is
finding them. They tend to be rather secretive as their business is semilegal
at best.

But living in Tarbean had taught me a thing or two.
I spent a couple of hours visiting the seedier taverns around the University,
making casual conversations, asking casual questions. Then I visited a pawnshop
called the Bent Penny, and asked a few more pointed questions. Finally I
learned where I needed to go. Over the river, to Imre.



CHAPTER FIFTY-ONE

Tar and Tin

AT
THE BEGINNING OF my second term, Kilvin gave me permission to study sygaldry.
This raised a few eyebrows, but none in the Fishery where I’d proven myself to
be a hard worker and a dedicated student.

Sygaldry, simply put, is a set of tools for
channeling forces. Like sympathy made solid.

For example, if you engraved one brick with the
rune ule and another with the rune doch, the two runes would cause the bricks to cling to
each other, as if mortared in place.

But it’s not as simple as that. What really happens
is the two runes tear the bricks apart with the strength of their attraction.
To prevent this you have to add the rune aru to each
of the bricks. Aru is the rune for clay, and it
makes the two pieces of clay cling to each other, solving your problem.

Except that aru and doch don’t fit together. They’re the wrong shape. To get
them to fit you have to add a few linking runes, gea
and teh. Then, for balance, you have to add gea and teh to the other brick,
too. Then the bricks cling to each other without breaking.

But only if the bricks are made out of clay. Most
bricks aren’t. So, generally, it is a better idea to mix iron into the ceramic
of the brick before it is fired. Of course, that means you have to use fehr instead of aru. Then you
have to switch teh and gea
so the ends come together properly….

As you can see, mortar is a simpler and more
reliable route for holding bricks together.

I studied my sygaldry under Cammar. The scarred,
one-eyed man was Kilvin’s gatekeeper. Only after you were able to prove your
firm grasp of sygaldry to him could you move on to a loose apprenticeship with
one of the more experienced artificers. You assisted them with their projects,
and in return they showed you the finer points of the craft.

There were one hundred ninety-seven runes. It was
like learning a new language, except there were nearly two hundred unfamiliar
letters, and you had to invent your own words a lot of the time. Most students
took at least a month of study before Cammar judged them ready to move on. Some
students took an entire term.

Start to finish, it took me seven days.

How?

First, I was driven. Other students could afford to
stroll through their studies. Their parents or patrons would cover the expense.
I, on the other hand, needed to climb the ranks in the Fishery quickly so I
could earn money working on my own projects. Tuition wasn’t even my first
priority anymore, Devi was.

Second, I was brilliant. Not just your
run-of-the-mill brilliance either. I was extraordinarily brilliant.

Lastly, I was lucky. Plain and simple.

 

I stepped across the patchwork rooftops of Mains
with my lute slung across my back. It was a dim, cloudy twilight, but I knew my
way around by now. I kept to the tar and tin, knowing that red tiles or grey
slate made for treacherous footing.

At some point in the remodeling of Mains, one of
the courtyards had become completely isolated. It could only be accessed by
clambering through a high window in one of the lecture halls or by climbing
down a gnarled apple tree, if you happened to be on the roof.

I came here to practice my lute. My bunk in Mews
was not convenient. Not only was music viewed as frivolous on this side of the
river, but I would only make more enemies by playing while my bunkmates tried
to sleep or study. So I came here. It was perfect, secluded, and practically on
my doorstep.

The hedges had gone wild and the lawn was a riot of
weeds and flowering plants. But there was a bench under the apple tree that was
perfectly suited to my needs. Usually I came late at night, when Mains was
locked and abandoned. But today was Theden, that meant that if I ate dinner
quickly, I had nearly an hour between Elxa Dal’s class and my work in the
Fishery. Plenty of time for some practice.

However, when I reached the courtyard tonight, I
saw lights through the windows. Brandeur’s lecture was running late today.

So I stayed on the rooftop. The windows to the
lecture hall were shut, so there wasn’t much chance of my being overheard.

I put my back to a nearby chimney and began to
play. After about ten minutes the lights went out, but I decided to stay where
I was rather than waste time climbing down.

I was halfway through “Ten Tap Tim” when the sun
slipped out from behind the clouds. Golden light covered the rooftop, spilling
over the edge of the roof into a thin slice of the courtyard below.

That’s when I heard the noise. A sudden rustling,
like a startled animal down in the courtyard. But then there was something
else, a noise unlike anything a squirrel or rabbit would make in the hedge. It
was a hard noise, a vaguely metallic thud, as if someone had dropped a heavy
bar of iron.

I stopped playing, the half-finished melody still
running through my head. Was another student down there, listening? I put my
lute back in its case before I made my way over to the lip of the roof and
looked down.

I couldn’t see through the thick hedge that covered
most of the eastern edge of the courtyard. Had a student climbed through the
window?

The sunset was fading quickly, and by the time I
made it down the apple tree most of the courtyard lay in shadow. I could see
from here that the high window was closed; no one had come in that way. Even
though it was quickly growing dark, curiosity won over caution and I made my
way into the hedge.

There was quite a lot of space there. Portions of
the hedge were nearly hollow, a green shell of living branches, leaving enough
room to crouch comfortably. I made note of the place as a good space for
sleeping if I didn’t have enough money for a bunk in the Mews next term.

Even in the fading light I could see I was the only
one there. There wasn’t room for anything bigger than a rabbit to hide. In the
dim light I couldn’t spot anything that could have made the metallic noise,
either.

Humming the catchy chorus of “Ten Tap Tim,” I
crawled through to the other end of the hedge. Only when I came through the
other side did I notice the drainage grate. I’d seen similar ones scattered
throughout the University, but this one was older and larger. In fact, the
opening might be large enough for a person to fit through, if the grate were
removed.

Hesitantly, I curled a hand around one of the cool
metal bars and pulled. The heavy grate pivoted on a hinge and came up about
three inches before stopping. In the dim light I couldn’t tell why it wouldn’t
go any farther. I pulled harder, but couldn’t budge it. Finally I gave up and
dropped it back into place. It made a hard noise, vaguely metallic. Like someone
had dropped a heavy bar of iron.

Then my fingers felt something that my eyes missed:
a maze of grooves etching the surface of the bars. I looked closer and
recognized some of the runes I was learning under Cammar: ule
and doch.

Then something clicked in my head. The chorus of
“Ten Tap Tim” suddenly fit together with the runes I’d been studying under
Cammar for the last handful of days.



Ule and doch are





Both for binding





Reh for seeking





Kel for finding





Gea key





Teh lock





Pesin water





Resin rock



Before I could go any further, sixth bell struck.
The sound startled me from my reverie. But when I reached out to steady myself,
my hand didn’t come to rest on leaves and dirt. It touched something round and
hard and smooth: a green apple.

I emerged from the hedge and made my way to the
northwest corner where the apple tree stood. No apples were on the ground. It
was too early in the year for that. What’s more, the iron grate was on the
opposite side of the small courtyard. It couldn’t have rolled that far. It must
have been carried.

Unsure of what to think, but knowing I was late for
my evening shift in the Fishery, I climbed the apple tree, gathered up my lute,
and hurried to Kilvin’s shop.

Later that night I fit the rest of the runes to
music. It took a few hours, but when I was done it was like having a reference
sheet in my head. The next day Cammar put me through an extensive two-hour
examination, which I passed.

 

For the next stage of my education in the Fishery,
I was apprenticed to Manet, the old, wild-haired student I’d met during my
first days at the University. Manet had been attending the University for
nearly thirty years, and everyone knew him as the eternal E’lir. But despite
the fact that we held the same rank, Manet had more hands-on experience in the
Fishery than any dozen higher-ranking students combined.

Manet was patient and considerate. In fact, he
reminded me of my old teacher, Abenthy. Except Abenthy had wandered the world
like a restless tinker, and it was common knowledge that Manet desired nothing
more than to stay at the University for the rest of his life if he could manage
it.

Manet started small, teaching me simple formulae of
the sort required for twice-tough glass and heat funnels. Under his tutelage, I
learned artificing as quickly as I learned everything, and it wasn’t long
before we worked our way up to more complex projects like heat-eaters and
sympathy lamps.

Truly high-level artificing such as sympathy clocks
or gearwins were still beyond my reach, but I knew that it was just a matter of
time. Unfortunately, time was proving to be in short supply.



CHAPTER FIFTY-FIVE

Flame and Thunder

I
HELD ALL OF my mourning for Savien and Aloine to a few moments.

Knowing I was still on display, I gathered myself
and straightened in my chair to look out at my audience. My silent audience.

Music sounds different to the one who plays it. It is
the musician’s curse. Even as I sat, the ending I had improvised was fading
from my memory. Then came doubt. What if it hadn’t been as whole as it had
seemed? What if my ending hadn’t carried the terrible tragedy of the song to
anyone but myself? What if my tears seemed to be nothing more than a child’s
embarrassing reaction to his own failure?

Then, waiting, I heard the silence pouring from
them. The audience held themselves quiet, tense, and tight, as if the song had
burned them worse than flame. Each person held their wounded selves closely,
clutching their pain as if it were a precious thing.

Then there was a murmur of sobs released and sobs
escaping. A sigh of tears. A whisper of bodies slowly becoming no longer still.

Then the applause. A roar like leaping flame, like
thunder after lightning.



CHAPTER FIFTY-SEVEN

Interlude—The
Parts that Form Us

MOVING
SLOWLY, Bast stretched and looked around the room. Finally the short fuse of
his patience burned out. “Reshi?”

“Hmmm?” Kvothe looked at him.

“And then what, Reshi? Did you talk to her?”

“Of course I talked to her. There would be no story
if I hadn’t. Telling that part is easy. But first I must describe her. I’m not
sure how to do it.”

Bast fidgeted.

Kvothe laughed, a fond expression wiping the
irritation from his face. “So is describing a beautiful woman as easy as
looking at one for you?”

Bast looked down and blushed, and Kvothe laid a
gentle hand on his arm, smiling. “My trouble, Bast, is that she is very
important. Important to the story. I cannot think of how to describe her
without falling short of the mark.”

“I…I think I understand, Reshi,” Bast said in
conciliatory tones. “I’ve seen her too. Once.”

Kvothe sat back in his chair, surprised. “You have,
haven’t you? I’d forgotten.” He pressed his hands to his lips. “How would you
describe her then?”

Bast brightened at the opportunity. Straightening
up in his chair he looked thoughtful for a moment then said. “She had perfect
ears.” He made a delicate gesture with his hands. “Perfect little ears, like
they were carved out of…something.”

Chronicler laughed, then looked slightly taken
aback, as if he’d surprised himself. “Her ears?” he asked as if he couldn’t be
sure if he had heard correctly.

“You know how hard it is to find a pretty girl with
the right sort of ears,” Bast said matter-of-factly.

Chronicler laughed again, seeming to find it easier
the second time. “No,” he said. “No, I’m sure I don’t.”

Bast gave the story collector a deeply pitying
look. “Well then, you’ll just have to take my word for it. They were
exceptionally fine.”

“I think you’ve struck that chord well enough,
Bast,” Kvothe said, amused. He paused for a moment, and when he spoke again it
was slowly, his eyes far away. “The trouble is, she is unlike anyone I have
ever known. There was something intangible about her. Something compelling,
like heat from a fire. She had a grace, a spark—”

“She had a crooked nose, Reshi,” Bast said,
interrupting his master’s reverie.

Kvothe looked at him, a line of irritation creasing
his forehead. “What?”

Bast held his hands up defensively. “It’s just
something I noticed, Reshi. All the women in your story are beautiful. I can’t
gainsay you as a whole, as I’ve never seen any of them. But this one I did see.
Her nose was a little crooked. And if we’re being honest here, her face was a
little narrow for my taste. She wasn’t a perfect beauty by any means, Reshi. I
should know. I’ve made some study of these things.”

Kvothe stared at his student for a long moment, his
expression solemn. “We are more than the parts that form us, Bast,” he said
with a hint of reproach.

“I’m not saying she wasn’t lovely, Reshi,” Bast
said quickly. “She smiled at me. It was…it had a sort of…it went right down
into you, if you understand me.”

“I understand, Bast. But then again, I’ve met her.”
Kvothe looked at Chronicler. “The trouble comes from comparison, you see. If I
say ‘she was dark haired,’ you might think, ‘I’ve known dark-haired women, some
of them lovely.’ But you would be far off the mark, because that woman would
not really have anything in common with her. That other woman wouldn’t have her
quick wit, her easy charm. She was unlike anyone I have ever met….”

Kvothe trailed off, looking down at folded hands. He
was quiet for such a long moment that Bast began to fidget, looking around
anxiously.

“There’s no sense worrying, I suppose,” Kvothe said
at last, looking up and motioning to Chronicler. “If I ruin this as well, it
will be a small thing as far as the world is concerned.”

Chronicler picked up his pen, and Kvothe began to
speak before he had the chance to dip it. “Her eyes were dark. Dark as
chocolate, dark as coffee, dark as the polished wood of my father’s lute. They
were set in a fair face, oval. Like a teardrop.”

Kvothe stopped suddenly, as if he had run himself
out of words. The silence was so sudden and deep that Chronicler glanced
briefly up from his page, something he had not done before. But even as
Chronicler looked up, another flood of words burst out of Kvothe.

“Her easy smile could stop a man’s heart. Her lips
were red. Not the garish painted red so many women believe makes them
desirable. Her lips were always red, morning and night. As if minutes before
you saw her, she had been eating sweet berries, or drinking heart’s blood.

“No matter where she stood, she was in the center
of the room.” Kvothe frowned. “Do not misunderstand. She was not loud, or vain.
We stare at a fire because it flickers, because it glows. The light is what
catches our eyes, but what makes a man lean close to a fire has nothing to do
with its bright shape. What draws you to a fire is the warmth you feel when you
come near. The same was true of Denna.”

As Kvothe spoke, his expression twisted, as if each
word he spoke rankled him more and more. And while the words were clear, they
matched his expression, as if each one was rasped with a rough file before it
left his mouth.

“She…” Kvothe’s head was bowed so low he seemed to
be speaking to his hands laying in his lap. “What am I doing?” He said faintly,
as if his mouth was full of grey ash. “What good can come of this? How can I
make any sense of her for you when I have never understood the least piece of
her myself?”

Chronicler had written most of this out before he
realized that Kvothe had probably not intended him to. He froze for a bare
moment, then finished scratching down the rest of the sentence. Then he waited
a long, quiet moment, before he stole a look upward at Kvothe.

Kvothe’s eyes caught and held him. They were the
same dark eyes that Chronicler had seen before. Eyes like an angry God’s. For a
moment it was all Chronicler could do to not draw back from the table. There
was an icy silence.

Kvothe stood and pointed at the paper that lay in
front of Chronicler. “Cross that out,” he grated.

Chronicler blanched, his expression as stricken as
if he’d been stabbed.

When he made no move, Kvothe reached down and
calmly slid the half-written sheet from under Chronicler’s pen. “If crossing
out is something you feel disinclined toward…” Kvothe tore the half-written
sheet with slow care, the sound bleeding the color from Chronicler’s face.

With terrible deliberateness Kvothe lifted a blank
sheet and lay it carefully in front of the stunned scribe. One long finger
stabbed at the torn sheet, smearing the still-wet ink. “Copy to here,” he said
in a voice that was cold and motionless as iron. The iron was in his eyes too,
hard and dark.

There was no arguing. Chronicler quietly copied to
where Kvothe’s finger pinned the paper to the table.

Once Chronicler was finished, Kvothe began to speak
crisply and clearly, as if he were biting off pieces of ice. “In what manner
was she beautiful? I realize that I cannot say enough. So. Since I cannot say
enough, at least I will avoid saying too much.

“Say this, that she was dark haired. There. It was
long and straight. She was dark of eye and fair complected. There. Her face was
oval, her jaw strong and delicate. Say that she was poised and graceful.
There.”

Kvothe took a breath before continuing. “Finally,
say that she was beautiful. That is all that can be well said. That she was
beautiful, through to her bones, despite any flaw or fault. She was beautiful,
to Kvothe at least. At least? To Kvothe she was most beautiful.” For a moment
Kvothe tensed as if he would leap up and tear this sheet away from Chronicler
as well.

Then he relaxed, like a sail when the wind leaves
it. “But to be honest, it must be said that she was beautiful to others as
well….”



CHAPTER FIFTY-NINE

All This Knowing

IN
THE FULLNESS OF TIME, and with considerable help from Deoch and Wilem, I became
drunk.

Thus it was that three students made their slightly
erratic way back to the University. See them as they go, weaving only slightly.
It is quiet, and when the belling tower strikes the late hour, it doesn’t break
the silence so much as it underpins it. The crickets, too, respect the silence.
Their calls are like careful stitches in its fabric, almost too small to be
seen.

The night is like warm velvet around them. The
stars, burning diamonds in the cloudless sky, turn the road beneath their feet
a silver grey. The University and Imre are the hearts of understanding and art,
the strongest of the four corners of civilization. Here on the road between the
two there is nothing but old trees and long grass bending to the wind. The
night is perfect in a wild way, almost terrifyingly beautiful.

The three boys, one dark, one light, and one—for
lack of a better word—fiery, do not notice the night. Perhaps some part of them
does, but they are young, and drunk, and busy knowing deep in their hearts that
they will never grow old or die. They also know that they are friends, and they
share a certain love that will never leave them. The boys know many other
things, but none of them seem as important as this. Perhaps they are right.



CHAPTER SIXTY-THREE

Walking and
Talking

WILEM
AND SIMMON WERE already well into their lunches when I arrived at our usual
spot in the courtyard. “Sorry,” I said as I set my lute on the cobblestones
near the bench. “Got caught up haggling.”

I had been on the other side of the river buying a
dram of quicksilver and a pouch of sea salt. The last had cost me dearly, but
for once I wasn’t concerned about money. If fortune smiled on me, I would be
moving up the ranks in the Fishery soon, and that meant my money troubles would
soon be over.

While shopping in Imre, I had also, quite by
coincidence, wandered past the inn where Denna was staying, but she hadn’t been
there, or at the Eolian, or in the park where we’d stopped to talk last night.
All the same, I was in a fine mood.

I tipped my lute case onto its side and flipped it
open so the sun could warm the new strings, helping them stretch. Then I
settled onto the stone bench under the pennant pole next to my two friends.

“So where were you last night?” Simmon asked too
casually.

It was only then I remembered that the three of us
had planned to meet up with Fenton and play corners last night. Seeing Denna
had completely driven the plan from my mind. “Oh God, I’m sorry Sim. How long
did you wait for me?”

He gave me a look.

“I’m sorry,” I repeated, hoping I looked as guilty
as I felt. “I forgot.”

Sim grinned, shrugging it off. “It’s not a big
deal. When we figured out you weren’t going to show, we went to the Library to
drink and look at girls.”

“Was Fenton mad?”

“Furious,” Wilem said calmly, finally entering the
conversation. “Said he was going to box your ears next time he saw you.”

Sim’s grin widened. “He called you a fluff-headed
E’lir with no respect for his betters.”

“Made claims about your parentage and sexual
tendency toward animals,” Wilem said with a straight face.

“‘…in the Tehlin’s cassock!’” Simmon sang with his
mouth full. Then he laughed and started to choke. I pounded him on the back.

“Where were you?” Wilem asked while Sim tried to
get his breath back. “Anker said you left early.”

For some reason, I found myself reluctant to talk
about Denna. “I met someone.”

“Someone more important than us?” Wilem asked in a
flat tone that could be taken for dry humor or criticism.

“A girl,” I admitted.

One of his eyebrows went up. “The one you’ve been
chasing around?”

“I haven’t been chasing
anyone,” I protested. “She found me, at Anker’s.”

“Good sign,” Wilem said.

Simmon nodded wisely then looked up with a playful
glint in his eye. “So did you make any music?” He nudged me with an elbow and
wagged his eyebrows up and down. “A little duet?”

He looked too ridiculous for me to be offended. “No
music. She just wanted someone to walk her home.”

“Walk her home?” He said suggestively, wagging his
eyebrows again.

I found it less amusing this time. “It was dark
out,” I said seriously. “I just escorted her back to Imre.”

“Oh,” Sim said, disappointed.

“You left Anker’s early,” Wil said slowly. “And we
waited for an hour. Does it take you two hours to walk to Imre and back?”

“It was a long walk,” I admitted.

“How long is long?” Simmon asked.

“A few hours.” I looked away. “Six.”

“Six hours?” Sim asked. “Come on, I think I’m
entitled to a few details after listening to you ramble on about her for the
last two span.”

I began to bristle. “I don’t ramble. We just
walked,” I said. “Talked.”

Sim looked doubtful. “Oh come on.
For six hours?”

Wilem tapped Simmon’s shoulder. “He’s telling the
truth.”

Simmon glanced over at him. “Why do you say that?”

“He sounds more sincere than that when he lies.”

“If the two of you will be quiet for a minute or so
I’ll tell you the whole of it. Fair?” They nodded. I looked down at my hands,
trying to collect my thoughts, but they wouldn’t fall into any sort of orderly
pattern. “We took the long way back to Imre, stopped on Stonebridge for a
while. Went to a park outside town. Sat by the river. We talked about…nothing
really. Places we’ve been. Songs…” I realized I was rambling and shut my mouth.
I picked my next words carefully. “I thought about doing more than walking and
talking but—” I stopped. I had no idea what to say.

They were both silent for a moment. “I’ll be,”
Wilem marveled. “The mighty Kvothe, brought low by a woman.”

“If I didn’t know you, I’d think you were scared,”
Simmon said not quite seriously.

“You’re damn right I’m scared,” I said in a low
voice, wiping my hands nervously against my pants. “You’d be too if you’d ever
met her. It’s all I can do to sit here instead of running off to Imre, hoping
to see her through a store window, or pass her crossing the street.” I gave a
shaky smile.

“Go then.” Simmon smiled and gave me a little push.
“Godspeed. If I knew a woman like that I wouldn’t be here eating lunch with the
likes of you two.” He brushed his hair away from his eyes and gave me another push
with his free hand. “Go on.”

I stayed where I was. “It’s not that easy.”

“Nothing’s ever easy with you,” Wilem muttered.

“Of course it’s that easy,” Simmon laughed. “Go
tell her some of what you just told us.”

“Right,” I said with dark sarcasm. “As if it were
simple as singing. Besides, I don’t know if she would want to hear it. She’s
something special…. What would she want with me?”

Simmon gave me a frank stare, “She came looking for
you. She obviously wants something.”

There was a moment of silence and I hurried to
change the subject while I had the chance. “Manet’s given me permission to
start my journeyman project.”

“Already?” Sim gave me an anxious look. “Will
Kilvin go along with it? He’s not a big one for cutting corners.”

“I didn’t cut any corners,” I said. “I just pick
things up quickly.”

Wilem gave an amused snort and Sim spoke up before
the two of us started to bicker. “What are you doing for your project? Sympathy
lamp?”

“Everyone does a lamp,” Wilem said.

I nodded. “I wanted to do something different,
maybe a gearwin, but Manet told me to stick to the lamp.” The belling tower
struck four. I got to my feet and gathered up my lute case, ready to head to
class.

“You should tell her,” Simmon said. “If you like a
girl you have to let her know.”

“How’s that working out for you so far?” I said,
irritated that Sim of all people would presume to give me relationship advice.
“Statistically speaking, how often has that strategy paid off, in your vast
experience?”

Wilem made a point of looking elsewhere while Sim
and I glared at each other. I looked away first, feeling guilty.

“Besides, there’s nothing to tell,” I muttered. “I
like spending time with her, and now I know where she’s staying. That means I
can find her when I go looking.”



CHAPTER SEVENTY-FIVE

Interlude—Obedience

IN
THE WAYSTONE INN, Kvothe paused expectantly. The moment stretched out until
Chronicler looked up from his page.

“I’m giving you the opportunity to say something,”
Kvothe said. “Something along the lines of, ‘That can’t be!’ or ‘There’s no
such thing as dragons….’”

Chronicler wiped the nib of his pen clean, “It’s
not really my place to comment on the story,” he said placidly. “If you say you
saw a dragon…” He shrugged.

Kvothe gave him a profoundly disappointed look.
“This from the author of The Mating Habits of the Common
Draccus? This from Devan Lochees, the great debunker?”

“This from Devan Lochees who agreed not to interrupt
or change a single word of the story he is recording.” Chronicler lay his pen
down and massaged his hand. “Because those were the only conditions under which
he could get access to a story he very much desired.”

Kvothe gave him a level look. “Have you ever heard
the expression white mutiny?”

“I have,” Chronicler said with a thin smile.

“I could say it, Reshi,” Bast said brightly. “I
haven’t agreed to anything.”

Kvothe looked back and forth between them, then
sighed. “There are few things as nauseating as pure obedience,” he said. “Both
of you would do well to remember that.” He gestured for Chronicler to pick his
pen up again. “Very well…. It was a dragon.”



CHAPTER SEVENTY-SIX

The Mating Habits
of the Common Draccus

“IT’S
A DRAGON,” Denna whispered. “Tehlu hold and overroll us. It’s a dragon.”

“It’s not a dragon,” I said. “There’s no such thing
as dragons.”

“Look at it!” she hissed at me. “It’s right there!
Look at the huge Goddamn dragon!”

“It’s a draccus,” I said.

“It’s Goddamn huge,” Denna said with a tinge of
hysteria in her voice. “It’s a Goddamn huge dragon and it’s going to come over
here and eat us.”

“It doesn’t eat meat,” I said. “It’s an herbivore.
It’s like a big cow.”

Denna looked at me and started to laugh. Not
hysterical laughter, but the helpless laugher of someone who’s just heard
something so funny they can’t help but bubble over with it. She put her hands
over her mouth and shook with it, the only sound was a low huffing that escaped
through her fingers.

There was another flash of blue fire from below.
Denna froze midlaugh, then took her hands away from her mouth. She looked at
me, her eyes wide, and spoke softly with a slight quaver in her voice,
“Mooooo.”

We had both gone from terrified to safe so quickly
that we were close to laughing from sheer relief anyway. So when she convulsed
with laughter again, muffling it with her hands, I started to laugh too, my
belly shaking as I tried not to make any noise. We lay there like two giggling
children while below us the great beast grunted and snuffed around our fire,
occasionally sending up gouts of flame.

After a long several minutes, we regained control
of ourselves. Denna wiped tears away from her eyes and drew a deep, shaky
breath. She slid closer to me until the left side of her body was pressed close
up against my right. “Listen,” she said softly as we both looked over the edge
of the stone. “That thing does not graze,” she said. “It’s huge. It could never
get enough food. And look at its mouth. Look at those teeth.”

“Exactly. They’re flat, not pointed. It eats trees.
Whole trees. Look at how big it is. Where could it possibly find enough meat?
It would have to eat ten deer every day. There’s no way it could survive!”

She turned her head to look at me. “How the hell do
you know this?”

“I read about it at the University,” I said. “A
book called The Mating Habits of the Common Draccus.
It uses the fire in a mating display. It’s like a bird’s plumage.”

“You mean that that thing down there,” she groped
for words, her mouth working silently for a moment, “is going to try and tup
our campfire?” She looked for a moment as if she was going to burst into
laughter again, but she drew a deep, shuddering breath instead, regaining her
composure. “Now that’s something I have to see….”

We both felt a shudder in the stone underneath us,
coming up from the ground below. At the same time, things grew noticeably
darker.

Looking down, we saw the draccus rolling in the
fire like a hog in a wallow. The ground shook as it wriggled around, crushing
the fire underneath itself.

“That thing must weigh…” Denna stalled out, shaking
her head.

“Maybe five tons,” I guessed. “Five at least.”

“It could come get us. It could push over these
stones.”

“I don’t know about that,” I said, slapping the
stone under my hand, trying to sound more certain than I really was. “These
have been here for a long time. We’re safe.”

While rolling in our overlarge campfire, the
draccus had scattered burning branches around the top of the hill. It now
wandered to where a half-charred log lay smoldering in the grass. The draccus
snuffed, then rolled, crushing the log into the earth. Then it came back to its
feet, snuffed the log again, and ate it. It didn’t chew. It bolted the log
whole, like a frog getting a cricket down into its gullet.

It did this several times, moving in a circle
around the now largely extinguished fire. It snuffed, rolled on the burning
pieces, then ate them after they were extinguished.

“That makes sense, I suppose,” Denna said, watching
it. “It starts fires and lives in the woods. If it didn’t have something in its
head that made it want to put out fires, it wouldn’t survive very long.”

“That’s probably why it came here,” I said. “It saw
our fire.”

After several minutes of snuffing and rolling, the
draccus came back to the flat bed of coals that was all that remained of our
fire. It circled it a few times, then walked over it and lay down. I cringed,
but it just shifted back and forth like a hen settling into a nest. The hilltop
below was now entirely dark except for the pale moonlight.

“How can I never have heard of these things?” Denna
asked.

“They’re very rare,” I said. “People tend to kill
them because they don’t understand they’re relatively harmless. And they don’t
reproduce very quickly. That one down there is probably two hundred years old,
about as big as they get.” I marveled at it. “I bet there aren’t more than a
couple hundred draccus that size in the whole world.”

We watched for another couple minutes, but there
was no movement from below. Denna gave a jaw-popping yawn. “Gods, I’m
exhausted. There’s nothing like the certain knowledge of your own death to
tucker you out.” She rolled over onto her back, then onto her side, then back
facing toward me, trying to get comfortable. “Lord it’s cold up here.” She
shivered visibly. “I can see why it’s cuddled up on our fire.”

“We could go down and get the blanket,” I
suggested.

She snorted. “Not likely.” She shivered visibly,
wrapping her arms around her chest.

“Here,” I stood up and took off my cloak. “Wrap up
in this. It’s not much, but it’s better than the bare stone.” I held it out to
her. “I’ll watch you while you sleep and make sure you don’t fall off.”

She stared at me for a long moment, and I half
expected her to beg off. But after a moment she took it and wrapped it around
herself. “You, Master Kvothe, certainly know how to show a girl a good time.”

“Wait until tomorrow,” I said. “I’m just getting
started.”

I sat there quietly, trying not to shiver, and
eventually Denna’s breathing leveled off. I watched her sleep with the calm
contentment of a boy who has no idea of how foolish he is, or what unexpected
tragedies the following day will bring.



CHAPTER SEVENTY-EIGHT

Poison

THE
ROAR OF THE draccus was like a trumpet, if you can imagine a trumpet big as a
house, and made of stone, and thunder, and molten lead. I didn’t feel it in my
chest. I felt it in my feet as the earth shook with it.

The roar made us jump nearly out of our skins. The
top of Denna’s head banged into my nose, and I staggered, blinded with pain. Denna
didn’t notice, as she was busy tripping and falling over into a loose, laughing
tangle of arms and legs.

As I helped Denna to her feet I heard a distant
crashing, and we made our way carefully back up to the lookout.

The draccus was…cavorting, bounding around like a
drunken dog, knocking over trees like a boy would topple cornstalks in a field.

I watched breathlessly as it came to an ancient oak
tree, a hundred years old and massive as a greystone. The draccus reared up and
brought its front legs down on one of the lower branches, as if it wanted to
climb. The branch, big as a tree itself, practically exploded.

The draccus reared again, coming down hard on the
tree. I watched, certain that it was about to impale itself on the broken limb,
but the jagged spear of hard wood barely dimpled its chest before splintering.
The draccus crashed into the trunk, and though it didn’t snap, it fractured
with a sound like a crack of lightning.

The draccus threw itself around, hopped and fell,
rolling over jagged spurs of rock. It belched a huge gout of flame and charged
the fractured oak tree again, striking with its great blunt wedge of a head.
This time, it knocked the tree over, causing an explosion of earth and rock as
the tree’s roots tore out of the ground.

All I could think of was the futility of trying to
hurt this creature. It was bringing more force to bear against itself than I
could ever hope to muster.

“There’s no way we can kill that,” I said. “It
would be like trying to attack a thunderstorm. How could we possibly hurt it?”

“We lure her over the side of a cliff,” Denna said
matter-of-factly.

“She?” I asked. “Why do you think it’s a she?”

“Why do you think it’s a he?”
she replied, then shook her head as if to clear it. “Never mind, it doesn’t
matter. We know it’s drawn to fires. We just build one and hang it from a
branch.” She pointed to a few trees overhanging the cliff below. “Then, when it
rushes over to put it out….” She made a pantomime with both hands of something
falling.

“Do you think even that would hurt it?” I asked
dubiously.

“Well,” Denna said, “when you flick an ant off a
table it doesn’t get hurt even though for an ant that has to be like dropping
off a cliff. But if one of us jumped off a roof, we’d get hurt because we’re
heavier. It makes sense that bigger things fall even harder.” She gave a
pointed look down at the draccus. “You don’t get much bigger than that.”

She was right, of course. She was talking about the
square-cube ratio, though she didn’t know what to call it.

“It should at least injure it,” Denna continued.
“Then, I don’t know, we could roll rocks down onto it or something.” She looked
at me. “What? Is there something wrong with my idea?”

“It’s not very heroic,” I said dismissively. “I was
expecting something with a little more flair.”

“Well I left my armor and warhorse at home,” she
said. “You’re just upset because your big University brain couldn’t think of a
way, and my plan is brilliant.” She pointed behind us, to the box canyon.
“We’ll build the fire in one of those metal pans. They’re wide and shallow and
they’ll take the heat. Was there any rope in that shed?”

“I…” I felt the familiar sinking feeling in my gut.
“No. I don’t think so.”

Denna patted me on the arm. “Don’t look like that.
When it leaves we’ll check the wreckage of the house. I’ll bet there’s some
rope in there.” She looked at the draccus. “Honestly, I know how she feels. I
feel a little like running around and jumping on things too.”

“That’s the mania I was talking about,” I said.

After a quarter-hour the draccus left the valley.
Only then did Denna and I emerge from our hiding place, me carrying my
travelsack, she with the heavy oilskin bag that held all the resin we’d found,
nearly a full bushel of it.

“Give me your loden-stone,” she said, setting down
the sack. I handed it over. “You find some rope. I’m going to go get you a
present.” She skipped away lightly, her dark hair flying behind her.

I made a quick search of the house, holding my
breath as much as possible. I found a hatchet, broken crockery, a barrel of
wormy flour, a mildewy straw tick, a ball of twine, but no rope.

Denna gave a delighted shout from the trees, ran up
to me, and pressed a black scale into my hand. It was warm with the sun,
slightly larger than hers but more oval than tear-shaped.

“Thank you kindly, m’lady.”

She bobbed a charming curtsey, grinning. “Rope?”

I held up a ball of rough twine. “This is as close
as I could find. Sorry.”

Denna frowned, then shrugged it off. “Oh well. Your
turn for a plan. You have any strange and wonderful magics from the University?
Any dark powers better left alone?”

I turned the scale over in my hands and thought
about it. I had wax, and this scale would make as good a link as any hair. I
could make a simulacrum of the draccus, but then what? A hotfoot wasn’t going
to bother a creature that was perfectly comfortable lying on a bed of coals.

But there are more sinister things you can do with
a mommet. Things no good arcanist was ever supposed to consider. Things with
pins and knives that would leave a man bleeding even though he was miles away.
True malfeasance.

I looked at the scale in my hand, considering it.
The thing was mostly iron and thicker than my palm in the middle. Even with a
mommet and a hot fire for energy, I didn’t know if I could make it through the
scales to hurt the thing.

Worst of all, if I tried I wouldn’t know if it had
worked. I couldn’t bear the thought of sitting idly by some fire, sticking pins
into a wax doll while miles away a drug-crazed draccus rolled in the flaming
wreckage of some innocent family’s farm.

“No,” I said. “No magic I can think of.”

“We can go tell the constable that he needs to
deputize about a dozen men with bows to come kill a drug-crazed big-as-a-house
dragon-chicken.”

It came to me in a flash. “Poison,” I said. “We’ll
have to poison it.”

“You’ve got two quarts of arsenic on you?” she
asked skeptically. “Would that even be enough for something big as that?”

“Not arsenic.” I nudged the oilskin sack with my
foot.

She looked down. “Oh,” she said, crestfallen. “What
about my pony?”

“You’ll probably have to skip your pony,” I said.
“But we’ll still have enough to buy you a half-harp. In fact, I bet we’ll be
able to make even more money from the draccus’ body. The scales will be worth a
lot. And the naturalists at the University will love to be able—”

“You don’t need to sell me,” she said. “I know it’s
the right thing to do.” She looked up at me and grinned. “Besides, we get to be
heroes and kill the dragon. Its treasure is just a perk.”

I laughed. “Right then,” I said. “I think we should
head back to the greystone hill and build a fire there to lure it in.”

Denna looked puzzled. “Why? We know it’s going to
come back here. Why don’t we just camp here and wait?”

I shook my head. “Look at how many denner trees are
left.”

She looked around. “It ate all of them?”

I nodded. “If we kill it this evening, we can be
back in Trebon by tonight,” I said. “I’m tired of sleeping outdoors. I want to
get a bath, a hot meal, and a real bed.”

“You’re lying again,” she said cheerfully. “Your delivery’s
getting better, but to me you’re clear as a shallow stream.” She prodded my
chest with a finger. “Tell me the truth.”

“I want to get you back to Trebon,” I said. “Just
in case you ate more resin than is good for you. I wouldn’t trust any doctor living
there, but they probably have some medicines I could use. Just in case.”

“My hero.” Denna smiled. “You’re sweet, but I feel
fine.”

I reached out and flicked her ear with the tip of
my finger, hard.

Her hand went to the side of her head, her
expression outraged. “Ow…oh.” She looked confused.

“Doesn’t hurt at all, does it?”

“No,” she said.

“Here is the truth,” I said seriously. “I think
you’re going to be fine, but I don’t know for certain. I don’t know how much of
that stuff you have left working its way into your system. In an hour I’ll have
a better idea, but if something goes wrong I’d rather be an hour closer to
Trebon. It means I won’t have to carry you as far.” I looked her square in the
eye. “I don’t gamble with the lives of people I care for.”

She listened to me, her expression somber. Then the
grin blossomed back onto her face. “I like your manly bravado,” she said. “Do
it some more.”



CHAPTER EIGHTY-ONE

Pride

LOOKING
DOWN I SAW the draccus pinned beneath the great wrought-iron wheel. It lay
motionless and dark in front of the church, and despite the necessity of it
all, I felt a pang of regret for killing the poor beast.

I had one long moment of exhausted pure relief. The
autumn air was fresh and sweet despite the woodsmoke, and the stone roof of the
church was cool under my feet. Feeling rather smug, I tucked the scale and
loden-stone back into my travelsack. I drew a deep breath and looked out over
the town I had saved.

Then I heard a grating noise and felt the roof
shift beneath me. The front of the building sagged, crumbled, and I staggered
as the world fell out from underneath me. I looked for a safe roof to leap to,
but there were none close enough. I scrambled backward as the roof
disintegrated into a mass of falling rubble.

Desperate, I leapt for the charred branches of the
oak tree. I grabbed one, but it snapped under my weight. I tumbled through the
branches, struck my head, and fell into darkness.



CHAPTER EIGHTY-THREE

Return

THAT
EVENING I GATHERED up my things and made my way down to the common room. The
townsfolk eyed me and murmured excitedly among themselves. I overheard a few
comments as I walked to the bar, and realized that yesterday most of them had
seen me wrapped in bandages, presumably with terrible wounds underneath. Today
the bandages were gone, and all they saw were some minor bruises. Another
miracle. I fought to keep from smiling.

The sullen innkeeper told me that he couldn’t
possibly dream of charging me, seeing as how the entire town was in my debt and
all that. I insisted. No no. Absolutely not. He wouldn’t hear of it. If only
there was something else he could do to show his gratitude.

I put on a thoughtful expression. Now that he
mentioned it, I said, if he happened to have another bottle of that lovely
strawberry wine…

I made my way to Evesdown docks and got a seat on a
barge heading downriver. Then, while I was waiting, I asked if any of the
dockworkers had seen a young woman come through here in the last couple days.
Dark haired, pretty…

They had. She had been by yesterday afternoon and
shipped downriver. I felt a certain amount of relief, knowing that she was safe
and relatively sound. But other than that, I didn’t know what to think. Why
hadn’t she come to Trebon? Did she think I had abandoned her? Did she remember
anything we had talked about that night as we lay on the greystone together?

We docked in Imre a few hours after dawn, and I went
straightaway to Devi’s. After some spirited bargaining, I gave her the
loden-stone and a single talent in order to wipe out my extremely short term
loan of twenty talents. I still owed my original debt, but after all I’d been
through, a four-talent debt no longer seemed terribly ominous, despite the fact
that my purse was largely empty again.

It took a while to put my life back together. I’d
only been gone four days, but I needed to make apologies and give explanations
to all manner of people. I’d missed an appointment with Count Threpe, and two
meetings with Manet, and a lunch with Fela. Anker’s had gone without a musician
for two nights. Even Auri reproached me gently for not coming to visit her.

I’d missed classes with Kilvin, Elxa Dal, and
Arwyl. They all accepted my appologies with gracious disapproval. I knew that
when next term’s tuitions were set, I would end up paying for my sudden,
largely unexplained absence.

Most important were Wil and Sim. They had heard
rumors of a student attacked in an alley. Given Ambrose’s smugger-than-usual
expression of late, they expected I had been run out of town, or, at worst,
that I was weighted down with rocks at the bottom of the Omethi.

They were the only ones that got a real explanation
of what had happened. Though I didn’t tell them the entire truth about why I
was interested in the Chandrian, I did tell them the whole story, and showed
them the scale. They were appropriately amazed, though they did tell me in
plain terms that next time I would leave a note for them or there would be hell
to pay.

And I looked for Denna, hoping to make my most
important explanation of all. But, as always, looking did no good.



CHAPTER EIGHTY-FIVE

Hands Against Me

SIMMON
AND WILEM TOOK me to my room at Anker’s where I fell into bed and spent
eighteen hours behind the doors of sleep. When I woke the next day I felt
surprisingly good, considering I had slept in my clothes and my bladder felt
stretched to the size of a sweetmelon.

Fortune smiled on me, giving me enough time for a
meal and a bath before one of Jamison’s errand boys tracked me down. I was
needed in the Masters’ Hall. I was due to be on the horns in half an hour.

 

Ambrose and I stood before the masters’ table. He
had accused me of malfeasance. In retaliation I had accused him of theft,
destruction of property, and Conduct Unbecoming a Member of the Arcanum. After
my previous experience on the horns I had familiarized myself with the Rerum Codex, the University’s official rules. I had read
them twice to be certain of how things were done around here. I knew them like
the backs of my hands.

Unfortunately, this meant I knew exactly how much
trouble I was in. The charge of malfeasance was a serious one. If they found me
guilty of intentionally harming Ambrose, I would be whipped and expelled from
the University.

There was little doubt that I had hurt Ambrose. He
was bruised and limping. A garish red abrasion colored his forehead. He wore a
sling as well, but I was fairly certain that was merely a piece of drama he had
added on his own.

The trouble was, I didn’t have the slightest idea
what had really happened. I hadn’t had the opportunity to speak with anyone.
Not even to thank Elodin for helping me yesterday in Kilvin’s shop.

The masters allowed each of us to speak our piece.
Ambrose was on his best behavior, which meant he was very polite when he spoke
at all. After a while, I began to suspect that his sluggishness might be from a
too-liberal dose of painkiller. By the glaze in his eyes, my guess was
laudanum.

“Let’s deal with the grievances in order of their
severity,” the Chancellor said after we had related our sides of the story.

Master Hemme made a gesture, and the Chancellor
nodded for him to speak. “We should pare the charges down before we vote,”
Hemme said. “E’lir Kvothe’s complaints are redundant. You cannot charge a
student with both theft and destruction of the same
property, it is either one or the other.”

“Why do you say that, Master?” I asked politely.

“Theft implies the possession of another’s
property,” Hemme said in reasonable tones. “How can you possess something that
you have destroyed? One charge or the other should be set aside.”

The Chancellor looked at me. “E’lir Kvothe, do you
wish to set aside one of your complaints?”

“No sir.”

“Then I call for a vote to set aside the charge of
theft,” Hemme said.

The Chancellor glared at Hemme, chastising him
silently for speaking out of turn, then turned back to me. “Stubbornness in the
face of reason is hardly laudable E’lir, and Master Hemme makes a convincing
argument.”

“Master Hemme makes a flawed argument,” I said
evenly. “Theft implies acquisition of another’s
property. It is ridiculous to imply you cannot destroy what you have stolen.”

I saw a few of the masters nod at this, but Hemme
persisted. “Master Lorren, what is the punishment for theft?”

“The student may be given no more than two single
lashes across the back,” Lorren recited. “And must return the property or the
price of the property plus a fine of one silver talent.”

“And the punishment for destruction of property?”

“The student must pay for the replacement or repair
of the property.”

“You see?” Hemme said. “There is the possibility
that he would have to pay twice for the same lute. There is no justice in that.
It would be punishing him twice for the same thing.”

“No Master Hemme,” I interjected. “It would be
punishing him for theft and for destruction of property.” The Chancellor gave
me the same look Hemme had earned before for speaking out of turn, but I bulled
ahead. “If I had lent him my lute and he had broken it, that would be one
matter. If he had stolen it and left it intact, that would be another. It is
not one or the other. It is both.”

The Chancellor rapped his knuckles on the table to
quiet us. “I take it then, that you will not set aside one of the charges?”

“I will not.”

Hemme raised a hand and was recognized. “I call for
a vote to strike the charge of theft.”

“All in favor?” the Chancellor said wearily. Hemme
raised his hand, as did Brandeur, Mandrag, and Lorren. “Five and a half to
four: grievance stands.”

The Chancellor pressed on before anyone could slow
things down. “Who finds Re’lar Ambrose guilty of destruction of property?”
Everyone raised their hands but Hemme and Brandeur. The Chancellor looked at
me. “How much did you pay for your lute?”

“Nine talents and six.” I lied, knowing it to be a
reasonable price.

Ambrose roused himself at this. “Come now. You’ve
never held ten talents in your life.”

Annoyed, the Chancellor rapped his knuckles at the
interruption. But Brandeur raised a hand to speak. “Re’lar Ambrose does raise
an interesting point. How does a student who came to us destitute come by such
money?

A few of the masters looked at me speculatively. I
looked down as if embarrassed. “I won it playing corners, sirs.”

There was an amused mutter. Elodin laughed out
loud. The Chancellor rapped the table. “Re’lar Ambrose to be fined nine talents
and six. Does any master oppose this action?”

Hemme raised his hand and was voted down.

“On the grievance of theft. Number of lashes
sought?”

“None,” I said, raising a few eyebrows.

“Who finds Re’lar Ambrose guilty of theft?” the
Chancellor called out. Hemme, Brandeur, and Lorren kept their hands down.
“Re’lar Ambrose to be fined ten talents and six. Does any master oppose this
action?”

Hemme kept his hand down this time, looking sullen.

The Chancellor took a deep breath and let it out in
a rush. “Master Archivist, what is the punishment for Conduct Unbecoming a
Member of the Arcanum?”

“Student may be fined, lashed, suspended from the
Arcanum, or expelled from the University depending on the severity of
grievance,” Lorren said calmly.

“Punishment sought?”

“Suspension from the Arcanum,” I said as if it were
the most sensible thing in the world.

Ambrose’s composure broke. “What?” he said
incredulously, turning to face me.

Hemme chimed in. “Herma, this is growing
ridiculous.”

The Chancellor looked at me with a tinge of
reproach. “I’m afraid I must agree with Master Hemme, E’lir Kvothe. I hardly think
that this is grounds for suspension.”

“I disagree,” I said, attempting to bring all my
powers of persuasion to bear. “Think on what you’ve heard. For no other reason
than his personal distaste for me, Ambrose chose to publicly mock me, then
steal and destroy the only thing I owned of any value.

“Is this the sort of behavior that a member of the
Arcanum should exhibit? Is this the attitude you wish to cultivate in the rest
of the Re’lar? Are petty meanness and spite characteristics you approve of in
students who seek to become arcanists? It has been two hundred years since we
have seen an arcanist burned. If you succeed in giving guilders to petty
children such as this,” I gestured to Ambrose. “That long-standing peace and
safety will be over in a scant handful of years.”

It swayed them. I could see it on their faces.
Ambrose moved nervously beside me, his eyes darting from face to face.

After a moment of silence the Chancellor called for
the vote. “Those in favor of suspension for Re’lar Ambrose?”

Arwyl’s hand went up, followed by Lorren’s,
Elodin’s, Elxa Dal’s…. There was a tense moment. I looked from Kilvin to the
Chancellor, hoping to see one of their hands join the others.

The moment passed. “Grievance failed.” Ambrose let
out a breath. I was only slightly disappointed. In fact, I was rather surprised
I had managed to carry it as far as I had.

“Now,” the Chancellor said as if preparing himself
for a great effort. “The grievance of malfeasance against E’lir Kvothe.”

“From four to fifteen single lashes and mandatory
expulsion from the University,” Lorren recited.

“Lashes sought?”

Ambrose turned to look at me. I could see the
wheels in his mind turning, trying to calculate how heavy a price he could make
me pay and still have the masters vote in his favor. “Six.”

I felt a leaden fear settle into the pit of my
stomach. I didn’t care one whit about the lashes. I would take two dozen if it
would keep me from being expelled. If I were thrown from the University my life
was over. “Chancellor?” I said.

He gave me a tired, kindly look. His eyes said he
understood, but that he had no choice but to see things through to their
natural end. The gentle pity in his look frightened me. He knew what was going
to happen. “Yes, E’lir Kvothe?”

“Might I say a few things?”

“You have already given your defense,” he said
firmly.

“But I don’t even know what I did!” I burst out,
panic overwhelming my composure.

“Six lashes and expulsion,” the Chancellor carried
on in an official voice, ignoring my outburst. “All those in favor?”

Hemme raised his hand. Brandeur and Arwyl followed.
My heart sank as I saw the Chancellor raise his hand, and Lorren, and Kilvin,
and Elxa Dal. Last of all was Elodin who smiled lazily and waggled the fingers
of his upraised hand, as if waving. All nine hands against me. I was to be
expelled from the University. My life was over.



CHAPTER EIGHTY-SIX

The Fire Itself

“SIX
LASHES AND EXPULSION,” the Chancellor said heavily. Expulsion,
I thought numbly, as if I had never heard the word before. To
expel, to cast violently away. I could feel Ambrose’s satisfaction
radiating outward. For a second I was afraid that I was going to be violently
ill right there in front of everyone.

“Does any master oppose this action?” the
Chancellor asked ritualistically as I looked down at my feet.

“I do,” the stirring voice could only be Elodin’s.

“All in favor of suspending expulsion?” I looked up
again in time to see Elodin’s hand. Elxa Dal’s. Kilvin, Lorren, the Chancellor.
All hands save Hemme’s. I almost laughed out of shock and sheer disbelief.
Elodin gave me his boyish smile again.

“Expulsion repealed,” the Chancellor said firmly
and I felt Ambrose’s satisfaction flicker and wane beside me. “Are there any
further issues?” I caught an odd note in the Chancellor’s voice. He was expecting
something.

It was Elodin who spoke. “I move that Kvothe be
raised to the rank of Re’lar.”

“All in favor?” All hands save Hemme’s were raised
in a single motion. “Kvothe is raised to Re’lar with Elodin as sponsor on the
fifth of Fallow. Meeting adjourned.” He pushed himself up from the table and
made his way to the door.

“What?!” Ambrose yelled, looking around as if he
couldn’t decide who he was asking. Finally he scampered off after Hemme, who
was making a quick exit behind the Chancellor and the majority of the other
masters. I noticed he wasn’t limping nearly as much as he had before the trial
began.

Bewildered, I stood stupidly until Elodin came over
and shook my unresponsive hand. “Confused?” he asked. “Come walk with me. I’ll
explain.”

 

The bright afternoon sunlight was a shock after the
shadowy cool of Hollows. Elodin awkwardly pulled his master’s robes up over his
head. Underneath he was wearing a simple white shirt and a pair of rather
disreputable looking pants held up by a piece of frayed rope. I saw for the
first time that he was barefoot. The tops of his feet showed the same healthy
tan as his arms and face.

“Do you know what Re’lar
means?” he asked me conversationally.

“It translates as ‘speaker,’” I said.

“Do you know what it means?”
he stressed the word.

“Not really,” I admitted.

Elodin drew a deep breath. “Once upon a time, there
was a University. It was built in the dead ruins of an older University. It
wasn’t very big, perhaps fifty people in all. But it was the best University
for miles and miles, so people came and learned and left. There was a small
group of people who gathered there. People whose knowledge went beyond
mathematics and grammar and rhetoric.

“They started a smaller group inside the
University. They called it the Arcanum and it was a very small, very secret
thing. They had a ranking system among themselves, and your rise through those
ranks was due to prowess and nothing else. One entered this group by proving
they could see things for what they really were. They became E’lir, which means
see-er. How do you think they became Re’lar?” He looked at me expectantly.

“By speaking.”

He laughed. “Right!” He stopped and turned to face
me. “But speaking what?” His eyes were bright and sharp.

“Words?”

“Names,” he said excitedly. “Names are the shape of
the world, and a man who can speak them is on the road to power. Back in the
beginning, the Arcanum was a small collection of men who understood things. Men
who knew powerful names. They taught a few students, slowly, carefully encouraging
them toward power and wisdom. And magic. Real magic.” He looked around at the
buildings and milling students. “In those days the Arcanum was a strong brandy.
Now it is well-watered wine.”

I waited until I was sure he was finished. “Master
Elodin, what happened yesterday?” I held my breath and hoped beyond hope for an
intelligible answer.

He gave me a quizzical look. “You called the name
of the wind,” he said as if the answer were obvious.

“But what does that mean? And what do you mean by name? Is it just a name like ‘Kvothe’ or ‘Elodin’? Or is
it more like ‘Taborlin knew the names of many things.’”

“Like both,” he said, waving to a pretty girl
leaning out a second-story window.

“But how can a name do something like that?
‘Kvothe’ and ‘Elodin’ are just sounds we make, they don’t have any power by
themselves.”

Elodin raised his eyebrows at this. “Really?
Watch.” He looked down the street. “Nathan!” he shouted. A boy turned to look
in our direction. I recognized him as one of Jamison’s errand boys. “Nathan,
come here!”

The boy trotted over and looked up at Elodin. “Yes
sir?”

Elodin handed the boy his master’s robe. “Nathan,
would you take this to my rooms for me?”

“Certainly sir,” the boy took the robe and hurried
away.

Elodin looked at me. “Do you see? The names we call
each other are not Names. But they have some power
nonetheless.”

“That’s not magic,” I protested. “He had to listen
to you. You’re a master.”

“And you’re a Re’lar,” he said implacably. “You
called the wind and the wind listened.”

I struggled with the concept. “You’re saying the
wind is alive?”

He made a vague gesture. “In a way. Most things are
alive in one way or another.”

I decided to take a different tack. “How did I call
the wind if I didn’t know how?”

Elodin clapped his hands together, sharply. “That is an excellent question! The answer is that each of
us has two minds: a waking mind and a sleeping mind. Our waking mind is what
thinks and talks and reasons. But the sleeping mind is more powerful. It sees
deeply to the heart of things. It is the part of us that dreams. It remembers
everything. It gives us intuition. Your waking mind does not understand the
nature of names. Your sleeping mind does. It already knows many things that
your waking mind does not.”

Elodin looked at me. “Remember how you felt after
you called the name of the wind?”

I nodded, not enjoying the memory.

“When Ambrose broke your lute, it roused your
sleeping mind. Like a great hibernating bear jabbed with a burning stick, it
reared up and roared the name of the wind.” He swung his arms around wildly,
attracting odd looks from passing students. “Afterward your waking mind did not
know what to do. It was left with an angry bear.”

“What did you do? I can’t remember what you
whispered to me.”

“It was a name. It was a name that settled the
angry bear, eased it back to sleep. But it is not sleeping so soundly now. We
need to rouse it slowly and bring it under your control.”

“Is that why you moved to suspend my expulsion?”

He made a dismissive gesture. “You were in no real
danger of being expelled. You are not the first student to call the name of the
wind in anger, though you are the first in several years. Some strong emotion
usually wakes the sleeping mind for the first time.” He smiled. “The name of
the wind came to me when I was arguing with Elxa Dal. When I shouted it his
braziers exploded in a cloud of burning ash and cinder,” he chuckled.

“What did he do to make you so angry?”

“He refused to teach me the advanced bindings. I
was only fourteen and an E’lir. He told me I would have to wait until I was a
Re’lar.”

“There are advanced bindings?”

He grinned at me. “Secrets, Re’lar Kvothe. That is
what being an arcanist is all about. Now that you are a Re’lar you are entitled
to certain things that were withheld before. The advanced sympathetic bindings,
the nature of names. Some smattering of dubious runes, if Kilvin thinks you’re
ready.”

Hope rose in my chest. “Does this mean I’m allowed
access to the Archives now?”

“Ah,” Elodin said. “No. Not in the least. You see,
the Archives are Lorren’s domain, his kingdom. Those secrets are not mine to
give away.”

At his mention of secrets my mind settled on one
that had been bothering me for months. The secret at the heart of the Archives.
“What about the stone door in the Archives?” I asked. “The four-plate door. Now
that I’m a Re’lar can you tell me what’s behind it?”

Elodin laughed. “Oh no. No no. You don’t aim for
small secrets do you?” He clapped me on the back as if I’d just made an
especially good joke. “Valaritas. God. I can still
remember what it was like, standing down there looking at the door, wondering.”

He laughed again. “Merciful Tehlu, it almost killed
me.” He shook his head. “No. You don’t get to go behind the four-plate door.
But,” he gave me a conspiratorial look. “Since you are a Re’lar…” He looked
from side to side as if afraid that someone might overhear us. I leaned closer.
“Since you are a Re’lar, I will admit that it exists.” He gave me a solemn
wink.

Disappointed as I was, I couldn’t help but smile.
We walked for a while in silence past Mains, past Anker’s. “Master Elodin?”

“Yes?” His eyes followed a squirrel across the road
and up a tree.

“I still don’t understand about names.”

“I will teach you to understand,” he said easily.
“The nature of names cannot be described, only experienced and understood.”

“Why can’t it be described?” I asked. “If you
understand a thing, you can describe it.”

“Can you describe all the things you understand?”
he looked sideways at me.

“Of course.”

Elodin pointed down the street. “What color is that
boy’s shirt?”

“Blue.”

“What do you mean by blue? Describe it.”

I struggled for a moment, failed. “So blue is a name?”

“It is a word. Words are pale shadows of forgotten
names. As names have power, words have power. Words can light fires in the
minds of men. Words can wring tears from the hardest hearts. There are seven
words that will make a person love you. There are ten words that will break a
strong man’s will. But a word is nothing but a painting of a fire. A name is
the fire itself.”

My head was swimming by this point. “I still don’t
understand.”

He laid a hand on my shoulder. “Using words to talk
of words is like using a pencil to draw a picture of itself, on itself.
Impossible. Confusing. Frustrating.” He lifted his hands high above his head as
if stretching for the sky. “But there are other ways to understanding!” he
shouted, laughing like a child. He threw both arms to the cloudless arch of sky
above us, still laughing. “Look!” he shouted tilting his head back. “Blue!
Blue! Blue!”



CHAPTER EIGHTY-SEVEN

Winter

“HE’S
QUITE, quite mad,” I said to Simmon and Wilem later that afternoon at Anker’s.

“He’s a master,” Sim responded tactfully. “And your
sponsor. And from what you’ve told us he’s the reason you weren’t expelled.”

“I’m not saying that he isn’t intelligent, and I’ve
seen him do things that I can’t begin to explain. But the fact remains that he
is completely off his nut. He talks in circles about names and words and power.
It sounds good while he’s saying it. But it doesn’t really mean anything.”

“Quit complaining,” Simmon said. “You beat both of
us to Re’lar, even if your sponsor is cracked. And you got paid two span of
silver for breaking Ambrose’s arm. You got away free as a bird. I wish I had
half your luck.”

“Not quite free as a bird,” I said. “I’m still
going to be whipped.”

“What?” Sim said. “I thought you said that they
suspended it?”

“They suspended my expulsion,” I said. “Not the
whipping.”

Simmon gaped. “My God, why not?”

“Malfeasance,” Wilem said in a low voice. “They
can’t let a student get off bird-free after they’ve voted him guilty of
malfeasance.”

“That’s what Elodin said.” I took a drink. Took
another.

“I don’t care,” Simmon said hotly. “It’s barbaric.”
He hammered out his last word on the table with his fist, upsetting his glass
and spilling a dark pool of scutten across the table. “Shit.” He scrambled to
his feet and tried to keep it from spilling on the floor with his hands.

I laughed helplessly until there was water in my
eyes and my stomach ached. I felt a weight lift off my chest as I finally
regained my breath. “I love you, Sim,” I said earnestly. “Sometimes I think
you’re the only honest person I know.”

He looked me over. “You’re drunk.”

“No, it’s the truth. You’re a good person. Better
than I’ll ever be.” He gave me a look that said he couldn’t tell if he was
being made fun of or not. A serving girl came over with wet rags, wiped the
table clean, and made a few barbed comments. Sim had the decency to look
embarrassed enough for all of us.

 

By the time I made it back to the University, it
was fully dark. I stopped briefly at Anker’s to pick up a few things, then made
my way onto the roof of Mains.

I was surprised to find Auri waiting for me on the
roof despite the clear sky. She sat on a short brick chimney, swinging her bare
feet idly. Her hair made a gauzy cloud around her tiny form.

She hopped down when I came closer and gave a
little half step sideways that was almost like a curtsey. “Good evening,
Kvothe.”

“Good evening, Auri,” I said. “How are you?”

“I am lovely,” she said firmly, “and it is a lovely
night.” She held both her hands behind her back and shifted from foot to foot.

“What have you brought me tonight?” I asked.

She gave her sunny smile. “What have you brought me?”

I pulled a narrow bottle from underneath my cloak.
“I brought you some honey wine.”

She took hold of it with both hands. “Why, this is
a princely gift.” She peered down at it wonderingly. “Think of all the tipsy
bees.” She pulled the cork and sniffed it. “What’s in it?”

“Sunlight,” I said. “And a smile, and a question.”

She held the mouth of the bottle up to her ear and
grinned at me.

“The question’s at the bottom,” I said.

“A heavy question,” she said, then held her hand
out to me. “I brought you a ring.”

It was made of warm, smooth wood. “What does it
do?” I asked.

“It keeps secrets,” she said.

I held it to my ear.

Auri shook her head seriously, her hair swirling
around her. “It doesn’t tell them, it keeps them.” She stepped close to me and
took the ring, sliding it onto my finger. “It’s quite enough to have a secret,”
she chided me gently. “Anything more would be greedy.”

“It fits,” I said, somewhat surprised.

“They’re your secrets,” she said, as if explaining
something to a child. “Who else would it fit?”

Auri brushed her hair away behind her and made her
curious half step to the side again. Almost like a curtsey, almost like a tiny
dance. “I was wondering if you would join me for dinner tonight, Kvothe,” she
said, her face serious. “I have brought apples and eggs. I can also offer a lovely
honey wine.”

“I’d love to share dinner with you, Auri,” I said
formally. “I have brought bread and cheese.”

Auri scampered down into the courtyard and in a few
minutes returned with a delicate porcelain teacup for me. She poured the honey
wine for both of us, drinking hers in a series of dainty sips from a silver
beggar’s cup hardly bigger than a thimble.

I sat down on the roof and we shared our meal. I
had a large loaf of brown barley bread and a wedge of hard white Dalonir
cheese. Auri had ripe apples and a half dozen brown-spotted eggs that she had
somehow managed to hard-boil. We ate them with salt I brought out from a pocket
in my cloak.

We shared most of the meal in silence, simply
enjoying each other’s company. Auri sat cross-legged with her back straight and
her hair fanning out to all sides. As always, her careful delicacy somehow made
this makeshift meal on a rooftop seem like a formal dinner in some nobleman’s
hall.

“The wind has been bringing leaves into the
Underthing lately,” Auri said conversationally toward the end of the meal.
“Through the grates and tunnels. They settle in the Downings, so things are all
a-rustle there.”

“Is that so?”

She nodded. “And a mother owl has moved in. Made
her nest right in the middle of the Grey Twelve, bold as brass.”

“She’s something of a rarity then?”

She nodded. “Absolutely. Owls are wise. They are
careful and patient. Wisdom precludes boldness.” She sipped from her cup,
holding the handle daintily between her thumb and forefinger. “That is why owls
make poor heroes.”

Wisdom precludes boldness. After my recent
adventures in Trebon I couldn’t help but agree. “But this one is adventurous?
An explorer?”

“Oh yes,” Auri said, her eyes wide. “She is
fearless. She has a face like a wicked moon.”

She refilled her tiny silver cup with honey wine
and emptied the last of it into my teacup. After tipping the bottle all the way
upside-down, she pursed her lips and blew across the top of it in two sharp
bursts so that it made a hooting noise. “Where’s my question?” she demanded.

I hesitated, unsure as to how she would respond to
my request. “I was wondering, Auri. Would you mind showing me the Underthing?”

Auri looked away, suddenly shy. “Kvothe, I thought
you were a gentleman,” she said, tugging self-consciously at her ragged shirt.
“Imagine, asking to see a girl’s underthing.” She looked down, her hair hiding
her face.

I held my breath for a moment, choosing my next
words carefully lest I startle her back underground. While I was thinking, Auri
peeked at me through the curtain of her hair.

“Auri,” I asked slowly, “are you joking with me?”

She looked up and grinned. “Yes I am,” she said
proudly. “Isn’t it wonderful?”

 

Auri took me through the heavy metal grate in the
abandoned courtyard, down into the Underthing. I brought out my hand lamp to
light the way. Auri had a light of her own, something she held in her cupped
hands that gave off a soft, blue-green glow. I was curious about what she held
but didn’t want to press her for too many secrets at once.

At first the Underthing was exactly what I had
expected. Tunnels and pipes. Pipes for sewage, water, steam, and coal gas.
Great black pig-iron pipes a man could crawl through, small, bright brass pipes
no bigger around than your thumb. There was a vast network of stone tunnels,
branching and connecting at odd angles. If there were any rhyme or reason to
the place, it was lost on me.

Auri gave me a whirlwind tour, proud as a new
mother, excited as a little girl. Her enthusiasm was infectious and I soon lost
myself in the excitement of the moment, ignoring my original reasons for
wanting to explore the tunnels. There is nothing quite so delightfully
mysterious as a secret in your own backyard.

We made our way down three spiral staircases made
of black wrought iron to reach the Grey Twelve. It was like standing in the
bottom of a canyon. Looking up I could see faint moonlight filtering in through
drain grates far overhead. The mother owl was gone, but Auri showed me the
nest.

The deeper we went, the stranger things became. The
round tunnels for drainage and pipes disappeared and were replaced with
squared-off hallways and stairways strewn with rubble. Rotting wooden doors
hung off rusted hinges, and there were half-collapsed rooms filled with
moldering tables and chairs. One room had a pair of bricked-up windows despite
the fact that we were, at my best guess, at least fifty feet below ground.

Deeper still, we came to Throughbottom, a room like
a cathedral, so big that neither Auri’s blue light nor my red one reached the
highest peaks of the ceiling. All around us were huge, ancient machines. Some
lay in pieces: broken gears taller than a man, leather straps gone brittle with
age, great wooden beams that were now explosions of white fungus, huge as hedgerows.

Other machines were intact but worn by centuries of
neglect. I approached an iron block as big as a farmer’s cottage and broke off
a single flake of rust large as a dinner plate. Underneath was nothing but more
rust. Nearby there were three great pillars covered in green verdigris so thick
it looked like moss. Many of the huge machines were beyond identifying, looking
more melted than rusted. But I saw something that might have been a waterwheel,
three stories tall, lying in a dry canal that ran like a chasm through the
middle of the room.

I had only the vaguest of ideas as to what any of
the machines might have done. I had no guess at all as to why they had lain
here for uncounted centuries, deep underground. There didn’t seem—



CHAPTER EIGHTY-NINE

A Pleasant
Afternoon

THE
NEXT DAY I was whipped in the wide cobblestone courtyard that used to be called
the Quoyan Hayel. The House of the Wind. I found it oddly appropriate.

As predicted, there was an impressive crowd for the
event. Hundreds of students filled the courtyard to overflowing. They peered out
of windows and doorways. A few even found their way onto the rooftops for a
better view. I don’t blame them, really. Free entertainment is hard to pass by.

I was lashed six times, singly, across the back.
Not wanting to disappoint, I gave them something to talk about. A repeat
performance. I did not cry out, or bleed, or faint. I left the courtyard
walking on my own two feet with my head held high.

After Mola laid fifty-seven tidy stitches across my
back, I found consolation in a journey to Imre where I spent Ambrose’s money on
an extraordinarily fine lute, two nice sets of used clothing for me, a small
bottle of my own blood, and a warm new dress for Auri.

It was, all in all, a very pleasant afternoon.



CHAPTER NINETY-ONE

Worthy of Pursuit

FALL
TERM SETTLED INTO a comfortable pattern after that. Fela slowly introduced me
to the inner workings of the Archives and I spent what time I could spare
skulking about, trying to dig up answers to my thousand questions.

Elodin did something that could, conceivably, be
referred to as teaching, but for the most part he seemed more interested in
confusing me than shedding any real light on the subject of naming. My progress
was so nonexistent that I wondered at times if there was any progress to be
made at all.

What time I didn’t spend studying or in the
Archives I spent on the road to Imre, braving the coming winter wind, if not
looking for its name. The Eolian was always my best bet for finding Denna, and
as the weather worsened I found her there more and more. By the time the first
snow fell, I usually managed to catch her one trip of three.

Unfortunately, I rarely managed to have her wholly
to myself, as she usually had someone with her. As Deoch had mentioned, she was
not the sort who spent a lot of time alone.

Still I kept coming. Why? Because whenever she saw
me some light would go on inside her, making her glow for a moment. She would
jump to her feet, run to me, and catch hold of my arm. Then, smiling, bring me
back to her table and introduce me to her newest man.

I came to know most of them. None were good enough
for her, so I held them in contempt and hated them. They in turn hated and
feared me.

But we were pleasant to each other. Always
pleasant. It was a game of sorts. He would invite me to sit, and I would buy
him a drink. The three of us would talk, and his eyes would slowly grow dark as
he watched her smile toward me. His mouth would narrow as he listened to the
laughter that leapt from her as I joked, spun stories, sang….

They would always react the same way, trying to
prove ownership of her in small ways. Holding her hand, a kiss, a too-casual
touch along her shoulder.

They clung to her with desperate determination.
Some of them merely resented my presence, saw me as a rival. But others had a
frightened knowledge buried deep behind their eyes from the beginning. They
knew she was leaving, and they didn’t know why. So they clutched at her like
shipwrecked sailors, clinging to the rocks despite the fact that they are being
battered to death against them. I almost felt sorry for them. Almost.

So they hated me, and it shone in their eyes when
Denna wasn’t looking. I would offer to buy another round of drinks, but he
would insist, and I would graciously accept, and thank him, and smile.

I have known her longer,
my smile said. True, you have been inside the circle of her
arms, tasted her mouth, felt the warmth of her, and that is something I have
never had. But there is a part of her that is only for me. You cannot touch it,
no matter how hard you might try. And after she has left you I will still be
here, making her laugh. My light shining in her. I will still be here long
after she has forgotten your name.

There were more than a few. She went through them
like a pen through wet paper. She left them, disappointed. Or, frustrated, they
abandoned her, leaving her heartsore, moved to sadness but never as far as
tears.

There were tears once or twice. But they were not
for the men she had lost or the men she had left. They were quiet tears for
herself, because there was something inside her that was badly hurt. I couldn’t
tell what it was and didn’t dare to ask. Instead I simply said what I could to
take the pain away and helped her shut her eyes against the world.

 

Occasionally I would talk about Denna with Wilem
and Simmon. Being true friends they gave me sensible advice and compassionate
sympathy in roughly equal amounts.

The compassion I appreciated, but the advice was
worse than useless. They urged me toward the truth, told me to open my heart to
her. To pursue her. Write her poetry. Send her roses.

Roses. They didn’t know her. Despite the fact that
I hated them, Denna’s men taught me a lesson that I might never have learned
otherwise.

“What you don’t understand,” I explained to Simmon
one afternoon as we sat under the pennant pole, “is that men fall for Denna all
the time. Do you know what that’s like for her? How tiresome it is? I am one of
her few friends. I won’t risk that. I won’t throw myself at her. She doesn’t
want it. I will not be one of the hundred cow-eyed suitors who go mooning after
her like love-struck sheep.”

“I just don’t understand what you see in her,” Sim
said carefully. “I know she’s charming. Fascinating and all of that. But she
seems rather,” he hesitated, “cruel.”

I nodded. “She is.”

Simmon watched me expectantly, finally said. “What?
No defense for her?”

“No. Cruel is a good word for her. But I think you
are saying cruel and thinking something else. Denna is not wicked, or mean, or
spiteful. She is cruel.”

Sim was quiet for a long while before responding.
“I think she might be some of those other things, and cruel as well.”

Good, honest, gentle Sim. He could never bring
himself to say bad things about another person, just imply them. Even that was
hard for him.

He looked up at me. “I talked with Sovoy. He’s
still not over her. He really loved her, you know. Treated her like a princess.
He would have done anything for her. But she left him anyway, no explanation.”

“Denna is a wild thing,” I explained. “Like a hind
or a summer storm. If a storm blows down your house, or breaks a tree, you
don’t say the storm was mean. It was cruel. It acted according to its nature
and something unfortunately was hurt. The same is true of Denna.”

“What’s a hind?”

“A deer.”

“I thought that was a hart?”

“A hind is a female deer. A wild deer. Do you know
how much good it does you to chase a wild thing? None. It works against you. It
startles the hind away. All you can do is stay gently where you are, and hope
in time that the hind will come to you.”

Sim nodded, but I could tell he didn’t really
understand.

“Did you know they used to call this place the
Questioning Hall?” I said, pointedly changing the subject. “Students would
write questions on slips of paper and let the wind blow them around. You would
get different answers depending on the way the paper left the square.” I
gestured to the gaps between the grey buildings Elodin had shown to me. “Yes.
No. Maybe. Elsewhere. Soon.”

The belling tower struck and Simmon sighed, sensing
it was pointless to pursue the conversation further. “Are we playing corners
tonight?”

I nodded. After he was gone I reached into my cloak
and pulled out the note Denna had left in my window. I read it again, slowly.
Then carefully tore away the bottom of the page where she had signed it.

I folded the narrow strip of paper with Denna’s
name, twisted it, and let the courtyard’s ever-present wind tug it out of my
hand to spin among the few remaining autumn leaves.

It danced along the cobblestones. It circled and
spun, making patterns too wild and varied for me to understand. But though I
waited until the sky grew dark, the wind never took it away. When I left, my
question was still wandering in the House of the Wind, giving no answers,
hinting at many. Yes. No. Maybe. Elsewhere. Soon.

 

Lastly, there was my ongoing feud with Ambrose. I
walked on pins and needles every day, waiting for him to take his revenge. But
the months passed and nothing happened. Eventually, I came to the conclusion
that he had finally learned his lesson and was keeping a safe distance from me.

I was wrong, of course. Perfectly and completely
wrong. Ambrose had merely learned to bide his time. He did manage to get his
revenge, and when it came, I was caught flatfooted and forced to leave the
University.

But that, as they say, is a story for another day.



EPILOGUE

A Silence of
Three Parts

IT WAS NIGHT AGAIN. The Waystone Inn lay in
silence, and it was a silence of three parts.

The first part was a hollow, echoing quiet, made by
things that were lacking. If there had been horses stabled in the barn they
would have stamped and champed and broken it to pieces. If there had been a
crowd of guests, even a handful of guests bedded down for the night, their
restless breathing and mingled snores would have gently thawed the silence like
a warm spring wind. If there had been music…but no, of course there was no
music. In fact there were none of these things, and so the silence remained.

Inside the Waystone a man huddled in his deep,
sweet-smelling bed. Motionless, waiting for sleep, he lay wide-eyed in the
dark. In doing this he added a small, frightened silence to the larger, hollow
one. They made an alloy of sorts, a harmony.

The third silence was not an easy thing to notice.
If you listened for an hour, you might begin to feel it in the thick stone
walls of the empty taproom and in the flat, grey metal of the sword that hung
behind the bar. It was in the dim candlelight that filled an upstairs room with
dancing shadows. It was in the mad pattern of a crumpled memoir that lay fallen
and un-forgotten atop the desk. And it was in the hands of the man who sat
there, pointedly ignoring the pages he had written and discarded long ago.

The man had true-red hair, red as flame. His eyes
were dark and distant, and he moved with the weary calm that comes from knowing
many things.

The Waystone was his, just as the third silence was
his. This was appropriate, as it was the greatest silence of the three,
wrapping the others inside itself. It was deep and wide as autumn’s ending. It
was heavy as a great river-smooth stone. It was the patient, cut-flower sound
of a man who is waiting to die. 

